A TRAIL of venues across Sydney and Newcastle have been placed on high alert after they were visited by young people infected with COVID-19.

Nine venues across Sydney and seven in Newcastle were yesterday notified that confirmed cases of coronavirus had attended their premises.

It comes as an inner-city bar and Maitland cafe each copped a $5000 fine for flouting social distancing rules.

NSW recorded 12 new cases of COVID-19 in the 24 hours to 8pm on Wednesday night. Ten were locally acquired and linked to clusters while two are under investigation.

Venues that have been put on alert after visits from infected people include the Jambo Jambo African restaurant, Eveleigh Hotel in Redfern, Warren View Hotel in Enmore, Mary's in Macquarie Place, Cubby's Kitchen, Burrow Bar, Woolworths Marrickville Metro, Penrith Plaza, Master Hot Pot in Canley Vale and BBQ City Buffet in Bankstown.

An infected man in Newcastle also visited the Bennett Hotel (pictured), Bar 88 and Sydney Junction Hotel between July 31 and August 2.

Patrons who visited Greenroof Bar and Restaurant, Sushi Revolution Hamilton, Queens Wharf Hotel or McDonald Jones Stadium between July 31 and August 2 have also been told to stay alert for symptoms.

Darlo Bar in Sydney was fined over an incident on August 1 where patrons were seated less than 1.5m apart.

And the Soul Origin cafe in Maitland was also fined after inspectors found no COVID signage as well as tables and chairs too close together.

It comes as government data has revealed young people are increasingly careful in following guidelines due to increasing concern for family members. Half of those aged 18 to 34 years are now complying, up from 40 per cent.
---
BRONCOS coach Anthony Seibold has broken his silence on David Fifita's bombshell de-parture to the Titans, insisting there was no dressing-room rift with Gold Coast's new $3.5 million man.

In his first interview on Fifita's decision to quit the Broncos at the end of the season, Seibold -addressed rumours the Queensland Origin star walked away amid concerns over the club's direction under the besieged Brisbane coach.

Seibold has maintained over the past six months he was confident of keeping Fifita, and as late as last Thursday Brisbane believed the superstar backrower would remain loyal.

Fifita's decision to accept a three-year, $3.5 million deal with the Titans went beyond money. The 20-year-old is said to be concerned over player unrest and his own development under Seibold.

Seibold is bitterly disappointed to lose Fifita but adamant his coach-player rapport with Brisbane's best backrow discovery in 20 years was not a factor in his defection to the Titans.

"All I want to say about Dave is that he made the decision that is best for him and his family," Seibold said before Friday night's clash against the Sharks at Suncorp Stadium.

"I am disappointed to lose Dave because he is someone I feel I have a good relationship with. I never wanted to see him go. I don't want to go into too much detail about this but I'm very respectful of Dave and his family.

"We all know a lot of details around Dave's situation and the only thing I want Dave to do now is focus on this year and do his job for us. I am looking forward to what Dave can do for us before he leaves." Fifita made his debut under former Broncos coach Wayne Bennett in 2018 and he kicked on last year, making his Queensland Origin debut in Seibold's maiden campaign at Red Hill.

But ructions appeared to surface earlier this season when Fifita picked up a knee injury in the season opener against the Cowboys and was chosen to play the following week against Souths at Suncorp Stadium.

It is understood Fifita had concerns about playing the Rabbitohs. He subsequently had knee surgery during the NRL's two-month COVID-19 hiatus, although he hoped to return this week against the Sharks.

Fifita's comeback has been put on ice and Seibold plans to unleash him against the Bunnies on Friday week.

Broncos board member Darren Lockyer backed Seibold's view that Brisbane did everything possible to keep Fifita. "With the dollars on offer, it's life-changing for him and his family," he said. "That sort of money may never be on the table again."
---
Brits upset Beijing with Uyghur report AUSTRALIA is not the only country being targeted by China's "wolf warrior diplomats", despite taking the lead on standing up to Beijing over issues including the coronavirus inquiry and human rights abuses against the Uyghur people.

The Australian Strategic Policy Institute has released a report titled "Trigger Warning", suggesting the Chinese Communist Party is running a "co-ordinated information campaign" to attack UK public broadcaster the BBC after it aired revelations of the systemic sexual assault of female prisoners in China's Uyghur internment camps.

"CCP diplomatic accounts, Chinese state media, pro-CCP influencers and patriotic trolls on Silicon Valley's social media networks are spreading messages and narratives that seek to undermine critical reporting by international media," the report said.

The report comes just days after revelations in a speech given in Canberra by senior Chinese diplomat Wang Xining complaining about the Australian media and threatening those who "choose to make enemies" with Beijing will be "cast aside by history".

Clive Hamilton, Charles Sturt University academic and author of Hidden Hand: Exposing How the Chinese Communist Party is Reshaping the World, said that the report further underlined the nature of the regime and its behaviour.

"China under Xi Jinping has taken bullying to the next level; any nation that stands up to Beijing now gets the treatment," he said.

"We are now in a fight for the future of democracy.

"If the West loses, we will end up doing Beijing's bidding on everything." The report also found strong connections between Chinese troll accounts on -social media that amplified COVID-19 origin conspiracy theories and those that attacked the British broadcaster.

According to the ASPI, of the 500 pro-China Twitter -accounts that had previously pushed the idea the coronavirus was actually invented in an American biowarfare lab, some 110 of them "shifted to criticise the BBC, repeating the same narratives pushed by Chinese diplomats and state media".

Nationals Senator Matt Canavan has lashed out at China.

"While the West is consumed by whether Dr Seuss is racist, China is cancelling anyone who dares criticise them," Mr Canavan said.

"The BBC's groundbreaking first hand accounts of the genocide that is occurring in Xinjiang reveals the moral bankruptcy of the Chinese Communist Party.

"The CCP's attempt to cancel the BBC should encourage all the more people to read the BBC's reports and push back against China's appalling treatment of the Uyghur people." The report warns that Western nations will need to be on guard against the CCP's "propaganda and disinformation apparatus". TIM BLAIR PAGE 13
---
PERTH's newly minted mus-eum has removed a reference to China from its COVID-19 exhibit after a complaint from the Chinese consul -general.

The Western Australian Museum Boola Bardip multimedia display had described coronavirus as "originating in mainland China".

WA Museum chief executive Alec Coles confirmed there had been a complaint. "The museum was … contacted by the acting consul-general in Perth about the factual errors, and we were pleased to advise the mistakes were immediately rectified," he said.

It has also changed a reference to the -island of Taiwan being -independent. The exhibit is housed in the Tianqi Lithium Collections Gallery, named after the Chinese mining company which donated $5 million to the museum in 2017.

A WA Museum spokeswoman said the local chief executive of Tianqi Lithium had contacted the Foundation for the WA Museum "for clarification".

"It is important to note that the changes to the exhibit were made in the interests of accuracy, not because of coercion, or in the interests of securing funding," she said.

Members of the mining company's board attended the Central Party School of the Chinese Communist Party, a university for the country's leaders. In a social media post, the museum said, "one label stated that COVID-19 originated in mainland China. The World Health Organisation is still investigating its origin, therefore this reference has been -updated."
---
But grand final lockout looming

THE NRL is resigned to a grand final with no crowd.

Amid the crazy ideas being offered to get the NRL season going again - and they run from relocating the entire NRL to the Cook Islands to a late bid yesterday from Hamilton Island, where high-falutin' folks like Matty Johns go to drink daiquiris - a grand final with no crowd might be the craziest idea yet to get our heads around.

But a premiership with nobody to celebrate in front of is the new reality. Anything more is a hope, at best.

It comes as the NRL gets serious about putting players into some form of a bubble, and Sydney's Olympic precinct is heavily favoured.

The best-case scenario to see out the season appears a relaxing of laws similar to round two when the competition went ahead inside empty stadiums. The lone positive is that players will live at home.

The NRL is being inundated with ideas. Fans who have stumbled upon The Solution, hotels and resorts looking for cheap publicity, are all taking a stab at providing the answer.

But each solution provides a problem. And each new day brings a narrowing of options.

The two-conference system, for instance, with half the teams at the Olympic precinct and the other half on the Gold Coast, or the Tangalooma Island resort, is almost certainly doomed.

Different jurisdictions have different rules in place.

Queensland has laws in place that insist anybody crossing into Queensland, like players returning from a game, must undergo a 14-day quarantine.

That means even in a two-conference system players will almost certainly have to be in the same state. That tips the future in favour of NSW.

While country towns like Gladstone have been suggested as possible bubbles given their isolation, the proximity of the teams being in Sydney to St Vincent's Hospital, where tests for COVID-19 can be turned around in hours, instead of days like it would take from country Queensland, makes Sydney more likely.

All remain up for debate when the innovation committee meets tomorrow. Much remains uncertain.

There might come a resolution ready to present to the Australia Rugby League -Commission for consideration or there might be a need for one more meeting before a resolution is ready.

Certainly plenty of work has already been done.

The crowdless grand final is one of a number of realities the NRL's new innovation committee will face tomorrow.

Led by Wayne Pearce, the committee is also expected to strongly consider moving players into quarantine early next month ahead of a May 28 resumption.

The players will enter the quarantine in stages so as not to overwhelm the testing process. Four hundred players over a weekend is too many.

The staged arrivals is the lone reason an Origin series to kick off the new-look season is being considered.

Origin would allow football to be played while teams gradually enter quarantine, ready to play by the time the series is over. There is not another good reason linked to it, but it might be enough.

Pearce, NRL head of football Graham Annesley and International Rugby League deputy chairman Troy Grant have been investigating bio-security and the business plan around restarting the -competition.

Grant, along with ARL Commission chairman Peter V'landys, has also been speaking to the government about restarting the season.

Raiders chief executive Don Furner is looking at the logistics of available venues and how to move the players in and out. Clint Newton is -liaising with players.

NRL chief operating officer Andrew Abdo is looking at the commercial side, primarily the structure of the draw. One complete round and a conference system are some of the alternatives.

Sydney Roosters coach Trent Robinson is liaising with coaches about lead-in times and trials.

Some clubs, since gone quiet, initially suggested they needed as many as six weeks to get players ready.

This is a good example of when coaches should be ignored. The priority is to get the competition operating as quickly as possible.

The one challenge yet to be dealt with is how the players cope with isolation and, -primarily, for how long.

While boredom is making us all stupid at the moment it will be a fresh burden imposed on the players if they are placed in the bubble.

It is not a burden they should be asked to carry for too long. Given the downward trend of new infections it's hoped that enough restrictions will be lifted to allow the players to return home and then carry on the season under the same lim-itations as there were for round two.

The NRL knows it will bring fresh argument but every step forward has been a battle so far.

Full rounds, with no crowds, and a season in which every team plays each other once is the preferred option.Origin is fitted in, a full eight-team finals series goes ahead, and the grand final is played with no crowd.
---
JAMES Roberts came very close to walking away from rugby league after a horror year in which he struggled on and off the field as injuries, bubbles and negativity took control of his life.

The speedster played just six games for South Sydney last year before his season was cut short when he ruptured a pec against Newcastle.

However, it was his career that looked to have ended prematurely when he and the Rabbitohs agreed to part ways on compassionate grounds in November, fuelling fears we had seen the last of "Jimmy The Jet" in the NRL.

Roberts found life hard last year when COVID-19 and injury took their toll on him and his young family, forcing himself to check in to a rehabilitation clinic for help.

"I was thinking of throwing it all in and just getting away from rugby league, the media and all the negative stuff and all the pressures and just focus on my family to live a normal life," he said.

"Luckily I had some time away and I found that hunger again. I found a good balance with my family and I'm just enjoying everything.

"I just sort of got everything with my family in order and then had a long think about it. And I realised I really do love the game and it's my dream to do what I do.

"I thought I would just give it another crack and just enjoy it more instead of making it my job. Just enjoy coming to training and laughing with the boys. So that's where I'm at." While some clubs may have shied away from signing a player with his track record, the Wests Tigers showed faith in a young man who is desperate to return to his best on the field and is feeling mentally stronger than he has in years at his new home.

"I can't remember the last time (I've been in such a good head space), maybe in 2018 at the Broncos," he said after scoring a try in his side's 52-18 trial win over the Sea Eagles.

"I've got a clear head and I'm just enjoying my footy and my life outside of footy, and you know there's a lot to look forward to at the club.

"It's been quite enjoyable. I've sort of changed my whole mindset. Starting over and just being grateful for my job and the opportunity that I have, and I'm just enjoying my footy.

"I'm not worrying about the pressures and that outside noise. I'm just doing what I know I'm capable of and just enjoying my day-to-day life as well outside of footy.

"I've spent a lot of time with my family and just come to training and it was a good, good group of boys here and a lot of young boys. We're just shaping the culture to the way we want it to be in the future." Roberts made his State of Origin debut for the Blues in 2018 but among the flashes of brilliance have been plenty of setbacks, leading him to part ways with four clubs before landing at Leichhardt.

Michael Maguire, who coached him at the Rabbitohs in 2012, will be on hand to help Roberts every step of the way.

"He's been really good," Roberts said. "Over the years we've had our differences. I was a lot younger and a lot wilder. I had a few things going on. My priorities weren't in order.

"Now I'm in a good mind frame and it's good to work with him and try and excel my game on and off the field and help the young lads and try to get to my peak footy again. He's been really supportive of me and helped me a lot. And so is the club as well, so I'm really thankful for that.

"I feel very comfy and we're changing the culture and it's good to be part of it. It's good to just feed off the young boys and show them the way as well. There are good times ahead."

ALL THE NRL ACTION kayosport.com.au
---
Rugby star may tackle NRLW The world's best female rugby star, Charlotte Caslick, is considering a temporary switch to rugby league for a chance to play in this year's NRLW competition and State of Origin.

The Sunday Telegraph spotted Charlotte at Sydney Roosters headquarters in Moore Park last week with her manager Josh White. They were in talks with the club's NRLW coach Jamie Feeney.

The Olympic gold medallist from Rio is the star of the Aussie women's sevens team and one of rugby's biggest marketing assets in all forms of the men's and women's games.

The 25-year-old loves rugby union and is still fully committed to next year's Tokyo Olympics, but a crack at league would obviously be of interest.

White - who also manages champion cricketer Ellyse Perry - is in discussions with Rugby Australia regarding Charlotte's contract expiring on August 31 - about a month before the NRLW kickoff.

It is no big secret that rugby union is facing massive financial challenges post COVID-19.

The 25-year-old Queenslander is a playmaker who would be suited at halfback or five-eighth in rugby league.

Her presence would add enormous interest to the NRLW competition that is already growing rapidly in interest and popularity.

White hopes to have her future settled in the next few weeks. "If she was able to jump across to the NRLW this season, it would obviously be a great opportunity for an athlete of Charlotte's calibre to test herself against the best in women's NRL," White said. "Her passion is rugby but she has always followed rugby league and the North Queensland Cowboys."
---
Twiggy Forrest and a host of other business leaders are trying to replace our much-loved kangaroo with some awful new corporate logo designed to sell us to China A panel of wealthy elites, -including Twiggy Forrest, Alan Joyce and Mike -Cannon-Brookes, secretly -decided to jettison the beloved kangaroo as Australia's national symbol and replace it with an abstract image of a wattle that looks like a yellow COVID-19 virus cell.

Talk about bad timing. To be fair, in December, when the "Nation Brand" advisory council presented its final design to the government, the virus had only quietly started to circulate in Australia. They weren't to know they were advocating that Australia rebrand as a killer virus.

The council, chaired by mining magnate Forrest, was authorised in 2018 by former PM Malcolm Turnbull with $10 million to create a new national identity to market to the rest of the world.

It seemed like a good idea at the time, since the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade felt Australia's branding had become fragmented, with "no unified representation of the country internationally", according to its 2017 White Paper, which cited New Zealand's "100% Pure" as a model.

But, as ever, the devil was in the detail.

Leaving the running to a self-serving mining billionaire whose fortune depends on the Chinese Communist Party was always going to be a problem, pre-pandemic.

Today, Forrest's project is a fiasco.

Whether it looks like a coronavirus cell, a yellow snowflake, a gold disco ball, or an ink splodge, there is nothing remotely Australian about the logo, let alone appealing.

Instead it appears designed as a blank canvas to appeal to a Chinese market. While the design was "market tested" to 16,000 people in seven countries, headed by China, and over 300 CEOs, only 53 Aussie consumers were consulted.

"The design could well be Austria," says NSW One Nation leader Mark Latham, "a $3 million waste of money creating confusion -internationally.

"In light of the Wuhan virus, it's now plain embarrassing as it looks like a representation of COVID-19.

"It's a complete fiasco that should be chucked in the bin." Rather than retaining the traditional kangaroo logo which appears in our coat of arms, the council chose a stylised spherical blob representing a wattle flower rendered in gold dots.

Unlike New Zealand's black fern or Canada's maple leaf, the wattle blob is amorphous and generic.

In fact, the council's report warns "the word 'Australia' should appear under the mark at all times to … avoid misinterpretation".

There would be no misinterpretation if we used our recognisable and unique kangaroo, because the rest of the world has known what it represents since a 1773 account of Captain Cook's first voyage to the Pacific.

"We love our kangaroo - it is currently the most internationally recognised shortcut to Australia," says the report, presented to the government in December.

But, perversely, the kangaroo's instant recognition factor was judged a negative because it would "simply reinforce what people already knew about us".

The other black mark against Skippy was that "dual-branding situations of multiple kangaroos sitting side-by-side will not work".

But who said every kangaroo has to be exactly the same?

The flying kangaroo does not give Qantas jets a monopoly on what has been a beloved national symbol for two centuries.

The council chose the wattle, -hoping, "while not immediately recognisable internationally, it will become so over time".

The Morrison government -accepted all the council's recommendations, including the new logo and changing the current national slogan, "Australia Unlimited" to "Only In Australia".

In a letter to the council created on June 16, Trade Minister Simon Birmingham wrote: "The Australian government has … accepted the -recommendations of the Advisory Council.

"The new Nation Brand predates the global pandemic (but) it will be a critical part of the recovery." However, yesterday, the Prime Minister was having it both ways. "Whether it's the green and gold kangaroo or some extra new way of standing out, the world is going to know what buying Australian means," he said in a statement.

Birmingham also walked back his enthusiasm for the blob yesterday afternoon, saying: "Kangaroos will continue to be a key part of Australia's marketing.

"The Nation Brand … will simply seek to bring some consistency in how different government agencies, industry bodies, states and territories present themselves." So much for a unifying symbol.

There are two toxic threads to this branding exercise.

First is the embedded Year Zero ideology.

The council chose the wattle as a "a blank canvas, to tell a new Australian story".

But why does Australia need a "new story"?

We're not a blank canvas for other cultures to impose their views. As radicals in the West try to erase history, this is a signal to our foes that we no longer value our history, culture and tradition.

The brand also is designed to impose a "framework" on "the way the country talks about itself".

Good luck with that.

The report tells us the aim is to "shift perceptions of our nation". Is there a problem we don't know about?

Australia has a good reputation overseas, enhanced by our response to the pandemic.

In America, Australians are widely admired, in my experience. The only people who wring their hands about Australia's international reputation are China panderers and self-flagellating leftists who constantly find fault with our national identity, history, flag and system of government and bemoan a lack of cultural sophistication in the masses.

Sure, Australia's reputation is on the nose at present in China, but that's because our government rightly has stood up to the CCP by -demanding an inquiry into the origins of COVID-19.

In return, China has threatened us, placed boycotts on our exports, left our ships idling off shore, sent its agents into Parliament House to spy on us, and is widely believed to be the state-based actor responsible for hacking critical infrastructure.

As Forrest knows well, symbolism is everything in China, and the -symbol he is serving up, rendered in gold, symbolises wealth, riches and nobility.

Even if it ends up as yellow, since metallic inks are expensive and clog up high-speed printers, that is the Chinese royal colour (incidentally the least popular colour in the West). Since when did the democratically elected government outsource our identity to a self-serving oligarch?

Secondly is the catchline 'Only In Australia', which the report calls a "storytelling platform".

The phrase has a derogatory connotation in its most common usage "Only in America" always said with the roll of the eye. This is an open invitation to trolling which the council seems not to have considered.

Let's shelve the wattle blob and save our kangaroo. Miranda Devine is in New York for 18 months to cover current affairs for The Daily Telegraph
---
* Shock Broncos twist * Green: No player split * Kent: Strange days

OUSTED North Queensland coach Paul Green's close friendship with powerful Brisbane Broncos board member Darren Lockyer could be key in the race to replace Anthony Seibold.

Ahead of Brisbane's annual general meeting on Tuesday, it can be revealed that Green has been catapulted to the top of the Broncos' coaching hit-list alongside Kevin Walters.

Green also has a solid and longstanding friendship with Ben Ikin, a leading contender to take over from Paul White as Broncos chief executive. Ikin was on the Cowboys' board when Green was handed the job following Neil Henry's sacking in 2013.

Green is understood to have received a significant payout - close to $1 million - to make his exit from Townsville with a season-and-a-half to run on his contract.

His departure means the Cowboys are also on the lookout for a new head coach, and Josh Hannay will take over for the interim. Anthony Griffin, Kristian Woolf, Nathan Brown, Walters and Green's former assistants David Fairleigh and Todd Payten have been mentioned, although the Cowboys have had no discussions with outside coaches.

That hunt is expected to start immediately following Friday night's showdown with Manly.

But the timing for Green could not be more ideal given Seibold is considered a dead man walking.

Stephen Kearney's former job at the New Zealand Warriors is also up for grabs, while Green's name was being pushed at Cronulla earlier this year.

It was also suggested that Green could take Walters' Queensland Origin job if Walters replaced Seibold.

It now seems to be a matter of when, not if, the Broncos board will pull the trigger on Seibold.

The Broncos board is preparing for a huge backlash at Tuesday's CONTINUED PAGE 51 FROM BACK PAGE AGM, which will be done via video link because of COVID-19 restrictions. But there will be no escaping the reality and angry shareholders are expected to demand answers on the coaching front, as well as what is being done to stem the bleeding at a once proud club that has hit an all-time low.

While the Broncos' board has tried desperately to give Seibold as much support as possible, the reality is the 48-0 loss to Wests Tigers last Friday night has basically made his position untenable.

The greater fear now is that if the Tigers could do what they did to the Broncos last week, Friday's clash against Melbourne threatens to end in a cricket score.

Enter Green, who has had a strong desire to coach the Broncos since he worked under Wayne Bennett a decade ago.

Green also played a handful of games at the club, while he won premierships with Wynnum Manly.

Until this point, Walters (pictured) was viewed as the man most likely to take over from Seibold because of his proud Broncos history.

While Walters has no experience as an NRL head coach, he is the Maroons' -Origin coach and adored at every level of Queensland rugby league. He would pull together the angry club legends as well as the fans.

In Green's favour is his close relationship with people of influence, while his -coaching record is also pretty outstanding.

Green's highlight in six-and-a-half years at the Cowboys was beating the Broncos to win the 2015 premiership, although his effort to take the club to the 2017 grand final without Johnathan Thurston was also a huge coaching achievement.

"I'll take some time, take a break and clear my head, and then decide what's next," Green said on Monday.

"Whilst my time coaching the Cowboys has come to an end, my time as a head coach has not, so I'll be looking for an opportunity at some stage." Green's problems at the Cowboys had been dragging on for some time as his relationship with some senior players deteriorated.

A blazing row with Michael Morgan following a match in Newcastle last year while on a night out was considered a -tipping point.

Green is known to have an extremely smart footy brain and a wonderful coaching ability, but his man-management skills have been known to let him down.

It just got to the stage at the Cowboys where both parties needed a fresh start, although the -parting was done with immense respect.

It is understood Green and club chairman Lewis Ramsay spoke last Wednesday following the 42-16 loss to the Sydney Roosters and it was decided Green would not be coaching the Cowboys next year.

That was followed by another conversation last Friday when Ramsay and Green agreed the game against -Penrith would be Green's last at the club.

But only board members and senior management were aware of the situation. The players were told on Sunday night they would be required for an 11am meeting on Monday, where Green told them he was moving on.
---
The COVID-19 controversy continues to rage with more evidence for the lab theory By the day, it's looking less likely that the coronavirus pandemic began with unhygienic exotic animals at the Wuhan wet market.

There is now also global scientific debate among geneticists, immunologists and virologists about whether SARS-CoV-2 was genetically altered or is a naturally occurring virus.

The conversation is moving quickly as more evidence emerges about COVID-19, now that scientists have had time to conduct detailed analysis of its genetic properties.

While intelligence agencies continue to probe the origins of the virus, a longstanding former member of the community contributed to the conversation this week with his view it may have originated in a laboratory.

The former boss of MI6, Sir Richard Dearlove, told The Telegraph in the UK it's possible COVID-19 was manufactured in a laboratory and he believes the pandemic "started as an accident".

His comments came days after Australia's former head of ASIO, DFAT and Defence, Dennis Richardson, told me accidents can happen in laboratories and there should be a security review of bio-containment facilities- -globally in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic.

Just as significant were comments made by the Chinese Centre for Disease Control director, Gao Fu, who said the wet market helped spread the virus but was not the original source of the outbreak. This was an extraordinary statement from a senior member of the Chinese scientific community.

Several serious scientific papers have now also distanced the original outbreak from the wet market.

One of these is a scientific paper by Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard and the University of British Columbia, awaiting peer review, which stated that there is currently no evidence to show that the coronavirus originated in the wet market.

"There has been considerable debate among scientists and the public on whether SARS-CoV-2 originated from the Wuhan Huanan seafood market," the paper states.

"However, phylogenetic tracking suggests that SARS-CoV-2 had been imported into the market by humans." China has either destroyed or suppressed most of the evidence from the earliest cases of COVID-19, bleaching market stalls, reportedly killing animals from the market and expunging virus samples that had been sent for testing.

There is now an emerging view in the scientific community that COVID-19 may have been created in a laboratory.

A number of European scientists no longer believe in a natural origin of the SARS-CoV-2 virus after studying -hundreds of papers on the matter. Their view is mostly based on two -characteristics about COVID-19 that scientists say are highly unusual.

The first is that it binds to a human ACE2 receptor cells more strongly than it does to any other animal.

The second is that it has a furin cleavage site insert at the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2 which its closest genetic bat-coronavirus relative, RaTG-13, does not have. This makes it highly -infectious to humans.

It's this sequence Dearlove referred to, referencing a scientific paper. "Such an insertion is very rare in evolution, the addition of such four amino acids alone in the course of only 20 years is very unlikely," Israeli geneticist, Dr Ronen Shemesh, who is working on a treatment for COVID-19, told me.

He said he believes genetic engineering "is the only way an insertion like the furin protease cleavage site could have been introduced directly at the right place and become effective".

A preprint paper by the Nobel prize winner, Luc Montagnier, and colleague, Jean Claude Perez, claims there are genetic fragments of the HIV1, HIV2 and SIV retroviruses present in the -genome of COVID-19.

Their hypothesis is it is a "partially synthetic genome".

Other scientists say that this furin cleavage site could have occurred -naturally and vehemently reject the findings made by their colleagues.

The point is, this is now a matter of genuine scientific debate. Senior Australian government sources acknowledge this and say it would be "unwise to rule out the possibility" the virus was created in a laboratory.

The official government language is changing, too.

When I interviewed Minister for the Pacific and International Development Alex Hawke and chair of the Joint -Parliamentary Committee for Intelligence Andrew Hastie on my Sky -program this week neither said the wet market was the most likely source of the outbreak.

"I think there's a lot of contentions about (the origin) and all of them -deserve to have some consideration and serious consideration," Hawke said.

Hastie said "we have to be open-minded about all possibilities". "We can't rush to any sort of -judgment, we should have an open mind and an open mind is for closing," he said.

Asked why he thinks the left section of the media wants to exclude the -possibility COVID-19 may have leaked from a laboratory, he said: "Politics it seems is everywhere including in the media.

"As far as I'm concerned we should be open-minded and we shouldn't jump to conclusions so let's hope this issue isn't weaponised any further and we get to the bottom of it." How deeply the world has been affected by COVID-19 - from the lives lost to the devastating economic destruction - has given rise to a global parliamentary bipartisan group set up to tackle China's handling of the pandemic and its rising authoritarianism.

While well-known UK-based think-tank strategist Samuel Armstrong was a driving force in forming this global group, Hastie, James Paterson and Kimberley Kitching were among the core organisers who made it happen.

Tim Wilson, Amanda Stoker, Claire Chandler and Alex Antic are other -inaugural Liberal members.

"This is the Wolverines gone global," Paterson said.

The group, called the Inter-Parliamentary Alliance on China, will tackle Beijing's crackdown on human rights, the handling of Hong Kong, the Uighurs, the South China Sea, and more.

"We have German Greens and Canadian Liberals and British Conservatives. These are not normally people who agree with each other. But on China we do," Paterson said.

"We can find strength in this broad global solidarity which I believe will only grow and expand from here." It's China's cover-up of the virus that has brought such an unlikely group of MPs from all political stripes together. And this group will need every ounce of strength, resolution and drive to get to the bottom of the -pandemic's origins.
---
Cordner says players ready for isolation KANGAROOS stars Boyd Cordner and Cameron Murray have thrown their heavyweight support behind Project Apollo, convinced rugby league's biggest names will lockdown immediately if it means resurrecting the code.

With ARLC chairman Peter V'landys wanting to restart the NRL season by June, both Cordner and Murray have told The Saturday Telegraph that Australian Test players will do "whatever it takes" to assist in the bold comeback plan.

Already, the newly-formed NRL innovation committee has been tasked with reviving the competition within the next eight weeks, even if it means putting all 16 clubs into quarantine.

Another option is restarting with a State of Origin series, with potential lockdown zones including Sydney Olympic Park, the Queensland town of Gladstone, or even a remote -island in the Pacific Ocean.

CONTINUED PAGE 93 FROM BACK PAGE Asked about going into lockdown so that rugby league could restart during the COVID-19 pandemic, Cordner said: "As players, we need to do whatever it takes. And if going into isolation is required by the game to get things started again, I'm sure that's what we'll do.

"We've seen what the Warriors were prepared to do, and then what they did over a couple of weeks to keep the NRL running. And as rugby league players, this is what we do … we want to play." While the Roosters' superstar added that isolating for weeks, and potentially months, would be difficult for some NRL players - "especially those with large families" - he stressed the sacrifice would be worth it.

"Obviously a lot of guys are at different stages in their lives," Cordner said. "Some are young, single and would have no problem going into isolation. Others though, have big families and obviously it's going to be a lot more difficult for them. But at the same time, I think every player realises we wouldn't have the lives we do without rugby league. So you have to do everything possible to get back to the game." South Sydney star Murray agreed.

"Personally, I'm happy to do whatever it takes to start playing again," he said. "As long as it can be done in a safe environment that's approved by health professionals, I'm ready to go.

"Not only from a selfish point of view, because I'd love to be playing again, but also for the wider community. I think this issue is far bigger than just footballers getting paid again.

"Rugby league is an important part of Australian culture and I'll do whatever I can to get it going again." Currently, an eight-member committee led by ARL commissioner Wayne Pearce is working out ways to construct an environment where the NRL competition can resume while still ensuring the safety of its players.

Dubbed "Project Apollo", the push involves a range of scenarios that include having all 16 clubs together in quarantine, having teams separated into conferences or evenisolating clubs across NSW and Queensland.Asked when he thought the NRL season would resume, and how it might look, Cordner said: "Right now, that's a hard one to answer. Will we play a full season? I don't know. I'd like to think there's a chance but I'm guessing it will more likely be a modified competition."
---
Fears China lab virus origin theory could be WMD 2.0

THERE are concerns at senior levels of the Australian government that the United States' position that COVID-19 most likely leaked from a Wuhan laboratory is akin to their claims Saddam Hussein had weapons of mass destruction.

The concerns centre around a lack of substantial evidence to support the line of inquiry, pushed most strongly by the US, that COVID-19 was inadvertently released from the Wuhan Institute of Virology.

The theory is being investigated by the Five Eyes Intelligence network of Australia, New Zealand, Canada, the US and the UK.

But in recent days it has been promoted as the most likely cause of the outbreak by US President Donald Trump and Secretary of State, Mike Pompeo, who said there was "significant evidence" to support it.

The Daily Telegraph understands the Five Eyes network, including its security and intelligence agencies in the US and Australia, is not aware of the nature of this "overwhelming evidence" that Mr Pompeo and Mr Trump claim.

The Daily Telegraph understands the government's central concern is that the US may be putting undue emphasis on the theory the virus originated in a Wuhan laboratory and could be making the same mistake that George Bush and Tony Blair made when they pressured the UN weapons inspector to declare that Saddam Hussein possessed weapons of mass destruction, which was the validation for a second allied attack on Iraq.

In recent days Mr Trump said he has seen evidence that he was not allowed to share which supported the theory the coronavirus was an accidental leak from a level 4 bio-containment facility in Wuhan, where there have been concerns about safety practices.

It is understood that Australia has seen all of the evidence the US possesses under the intelligence sharing arrangement, and there is nothing to strongly or even reasonably suggest the naturally-occurring virus came out of the laboratory rather than the wet market.

It comes as sources told The Daily Telegraph the schism between the US executives' position on China's culpability for the outbreak and the intelligence agencies has put Scott Morrison in an awkward position.

The PM is trying to build support for a transparent and independent inquiry into the origins and the handling of the outbreak.

Mr Morrison is taking a more nuanced approach that avoids direct accusations against China as he seeks to build consensus for an inquiry at the World Health Assembly in Geneva next month.

Mr Morrison wrote to the G20 nations on Monday, pitching a review into the pandemic response.

"What's really important is that we have a proper review, an independent review, which looks into the sources of these things in a transparent way so we can learn the lessons," he said.

It is understood Mr Morrison does not want to publicly undermine comments made by either Mr Trump or Mr Pompeo.The issue has come to the fore after The Daily Telegraph revealed a dossier compiled by concerned western governments that lays out the case of negligence against China over its cover-up of the outbreak. The document does not overly focus on whether the virus originated from a laboratory, instead it centres on China's abject failings in its handing of the outbreak.
---
League's fastest caught speeding

THE fines just keep on coming for troubled Melbourne Storm winger Josh Addo-Carr.

On Tuesday, while he was driving home to Sydney from his Taree camping trip, Addo-Carr got pinched by the highway patrol for speeding on the Pacific Hwy near Nabiac.

We're told he was between 10 and 20km/h over the limit. Hard to believe, but true.

This follows the $1000 fine on Monday for failing to comply with social-distancing laws; a $50,000 fine from the NRL on Tuesday for the breach ($30,000 suspended); as well as being charged with a firearms offence on Tuesday afternoon.

It's been a shocking few days for the representative winger, who is now struggling to keep his place in both the NSW State of Origin team and the Kangaroos after losing the confidence and respect of Blues coach Brad Fittler and Australian coach Mal Meninga.

Still, Melbourne Storm are standing by him.

Your columnist spoke to Craig Bellamy on Thursday, who vowed to support the winger.

"What I can't work out is that if you knew you were doing the wrong thing, there's no way you'd put a photo out on social media," Bellamy said.

"The rules have been pushed hard but it's like he didn't understand the importance."

Rapana rejoins Green Machine NEW Zealand Test winger Jordan Rapana is back at the Canberra Raiders for the remainder of the NRL season.

He will resume tomorrow when the Raiders gather in the national capital for an education day on COVID-19 protocols.

Rapana cut short his Japanese rugby union stint with Panasonic Wild Knights when coronavirus forced a comp shutdown.

The 30-year-old winger returned to Canberra at the start of last month and spoke to coach Ricky Stuart about the possibility of a comeback. He was forced out after last year's grand final because of salary-cap pressure.Rapana had scored 61 tries in four seasons for the "Green Machine" and was regarded as one of the best finishers in the competition.
---
AS the sun sets on the first day of the new President of the United States its abundantly clear there has never been a more monumental occasion for the leader of the Free World.

Joe Biden starts his new job with the weight of expectation of a world wanting him to return some gravitas to the Oval Office.

Those who despised Trump will also want Mr Biden to make grand gestures and policy changes that are the antithesis of the Trump era.

There will also be those who become preoccupied with revenge for revenge's sake against a president they believe tainted the job, and indeed, democracy forever.

Those are the interest groups Mr Biden has to withstand.

It is one thing for justice to rightfully take its course and for Mr Trump to pay his dues for any unlawful activity and behaviour unbefitting a President - of which there are surely many. But Mr Biden's primary responsibility now is to correct the ship and, at the risk of sounding like a CNN soundbyte, unify as best he can a country which is still torn by anger, an anger which won't dissipate just because Mr Trump has left office.

The trap for Mr Biden and his team will be to mistake dealing with the radicals who stormed the Capitol as the main game. They are a sideshow, albeit a sideshow that has to bear the full force of the law. But a sideshow nonetheless.  Priority No.1, of course, is bringing COVID-19 under control, administering a successful vaccination program and using America's clout to ensure the investigation into the pandemic's origins is thorough and conclusive.

There needs to be no more ambiguity around the seriousness of the pandemic and its impact on families, jobs and the US health system coming from the Oval Office, which has up to now given strength to the ridiculous fringe groups such as the anti-mask movement. It is arguable that had the pandemic not occurred Mr Trump was on track to deliver on his promise of jobs growth and middle America prosperity and although that job has become a lot harder than it was it must remain a top priority for any government espousing the virtues of a united country. It is also incumbent on Mr Biden to restore some dignity and hope to the office - and in turn to the voters - that goes beyond a Hallmark verse. And, as simple as that sounds, it's often too easy a route for administrations that follow a term of government that was so laden down with unnecessary conflict and disappointment. America is going to need more than that.
---
UNFAIR DEAL BEIJING officials gave no warning before slapping an import ban on four Australian meat processors now stuck in limbo for months amid escalating tensions over China's handling of the pandemic.

The operators were blindsided to learn China had suspended their licences to export with immediate effect yesterday, due to technical labelling and certification issues dating back more than a year.

The sudden trade block came just weeks after a warning from the Chinese ambassador to Australia that exports including red meat, wine and education would be targeted if the Morrison government did not end its call for an independent inquiry into the origins of COVID-19.

Chinese newspaper the Global Times foreshadowed "economic repercussions" in an editorial published before the licence suspension that accused Australia of "joining in on the China blame game".

The nationalistic paper claimed relations between China and Australia were moving towards their "lowest point in decades".

The ban also followed China's announcement on Sunday it planned to introduce an 80 per cent tariff on Australian barley, which would cripple the industry.

The suspended meat processors, NSW Northern Co-operative Meat Company (NCMC), and three Queensland meatworks - Pastoral Company, Beef City and Dinmore - are working with the federal government to resolve issues so they can re-enter the Chinese market.

But NCMC chief executive Simon Stahl told The Daily Telegraph it could be two months before the company can resume exports to China, which accounts for 10 per cent of their business.

Based in Casino in northern NSW, the company employs 900 people and exports red meat to 26 nations.

Mr Stahl said he received a call from his Shanghai office late on Monday afternoon to say there were "murmurings in the market" about problems.

NCMC only learned of the suspension from the Australian Meat Industry Council. Mr Stahl said NCMC would work through the concerns via the Department of Agriculture, and "didn't want to read between the lines" as to whether politics was behind the ban.

"I will stay out of that," he said.

Mr Stahl said some of the product that would have gone to China can be sent to other countries.

Total NSW beef exports to China were worth $736 million last year. Trade Minister Simon Birmingham said it was "disappointing" China did not notify Australia before the suspension came into effect.

"The reason given for this suspension relates to instances dating back over more than a year of minor technical errors in relation to labelling or other technical requirements during this time," he said.

"My expectation is that the technical issues we will find have all been addressed."Export Council of Australia chair Dianne Tipping said "it's a big concern."
---
WEDNESDAY night's Origin Game 3 in Brisbane is about to set a world record for the biggest outdoor sporting event since the COVID-19 pandemic struck, as the 52,000 seat Suncorp Stadium edges closer to a sellout.

The Queensland Government announced last week that the blockbuster decider is set to be played in front of a -capacity crowd - almost all of them Queenslanders given the strict border regulations.

Since the announcement that the stadium could have a full capacity, the NRL has released 16,000 seats, of which only about 4000 remain.

Even with 48,000 sold, the game will be the largest sporting event in the world since the global pandemic took over, with Game Two of the Bledisloe Cup in New Zealand understood to have been the previous biggest crowd at 46,049. In Australia, the current record stands at 37,303 for the NRL grand final at ANZ Stadium. The expected sellout follows a year where huge sporting events such as the Melbourne Cup, English Premier League, the NBA and the NFL have been played behind closed doors, sometimes in newly-built stadiums.
---
Happy Smith's sights on cracking top 20 A QUEENSLAND State-of-Origin win rounded out a big week for Cameron Smith, who is within touching distance of his next golfing goal after a stunning Masters -performance.

Smith celebrated his Augusta scoring record, and Masters runner-up finish, with a "few beers around the fire" at home, taking in messages of congratulations - -including one from cricket legend Shane Warne.

The 27-year-old achieved something six-time champ and five-time winner Tiger Woods never could at Augusta, becoming the first player in Masters history to card four rounds in the 60s.

His final score of 15 under was still five shots behind Masters winner Dustin Johnson, but lifted Smith nearly 20 places on the world golf -rankings to 27 and a big step closer to the top 20 - one of many new goals he's set for 2021 and beyond.

"I would love to finally crack the top 20 in the world, I still haven't done that," Smith said from his home in Jacksonville on Thursday, still buzzing after getting up at 4am to watch the Maroons seal the Origin series.

"I've been close a few times. Obviously it's fluctuated a lot over the last couple years, given some performances. But that would be a cool one to just crack to say I've been there and hopefully stay there for a very long time." A two-time Australian PGA winner, and a winner on the USPGA Tour in Hawaii in January, talent to mix it with the best has never been an issue for Smith. But he conceded he had underestimated the need to "be happy" off the course to play his best.

For Smith, that means more time with mates, and less thinking about golf all the time - which he practised in two weeks off before the -Masters with good effect.

"Yeah, I think I've underestimated how important it is to just do your stuff off the course as well, just be happy with your normal life. -Obviously that has a huge -effect on how you play and how you perform," he said.

"So those two weeks off -before, just not anything major, just kind of went about my business, just took a good week off the golf clubs, went and hung out with some mates, and just got the head right before there. I think that was the really big key." Smith didn't hang around long at Augusta last Sunday, driving the four hours home where the magnitude of what he achieved, and what he'd missed out on, sunk in.

"All the guys I grew up playing golf with, they've all sent me a message," he said.

"The support's been unreal, especially from the local golf clubs and obviously Queensland and the rest of Australia, the support's been unreal.

"Yeah, it's kind of cool to see that on that level, what it means to some people.

"It was great to be that close, I guess, although I was close but far away in the sense that I still lost by five shots.

"That was a cool experience in a major to be right up there and giving it a crack on Sunday and still walk away with a pretty decent round." Smith will only pick up his clubs once more this year, in a team event with fellow Aussie Marc Leishman, before starting 2021 in Hawaii and defending his title at the Sony Open. But he won't return to Australia for Christmas, or defend his PGA title in Brisbane, which was cancelled because of the COVID-19 pandemic.

"I'd love to come home, I miss my family, my friends very much, but yeah, I just can't see it happening until the quarantine opens up," Smith said.

He said watching the -Maroons victory at Suncorp just reminded him of what he was missing.

"I watched the whole game. It was on at four in the morning," Smith said. "I went back into bed and I was just being all chirpy and (his girlfriend) Jordan said, 'Oh, they must have won'. I was like, 'Yeah, you're right they won'. I was just happy for them. "It was a cracking game, but obviously everyone was writing them off, and it's kind of cool when Queenslanders have a knack case of doing that, so it's good."
---
The relaunched NRL season promises more excitement and controversy than before, writes NICK WALSHAW

COVID-19 tests?

Check.

Security sweep of Bankwest Stadium?

Check.

Disinfected gyms, quarantined footballers and everyone vaccinated for flu? Check, check and … ah, close enough.

Nine weeks after world sport went into lockdown, the NRL is finally readying for what shapes as the greatest Australian comeback outside another Farnsey concert.

Truly, everywhere you look is an interesting story.

None bigger, of course, than Latrell Mitchell at South Sydney. But, geez, you've gotta love the Roosters chasing a third-straight title from 12th. Or Parramatta, after their first premiership since way back when Pricey played with grease in his beard.

Up in Brisbane, the Broncos again look a force. While in Townsville, Valentine Holmes is back from the NFL.

And how big a story is Nathan Cleary when he finally returns in the Panthers' No. 7 jersey?

All of this, too, before we get to the new world order under Australian Rugby League Commission chairman Peter V'landys (inset, below).

For this, remember, is the NRL comeback so many thought impossible. Others, irresponsible.

Regardless, V'landys and his small mob of believers pushed on anyway. Which means at a time where other sporting codes are only now beginning to stick large cotton swabs deep into their athletes' orifices, rugby league is preparing to kick off.

Which matters. Big time.

Starting with a Thursday Night Football blockbuster between Parramatta and Brisbane, the NRL is now set to whirl through 18 weeks before finals, a decider and then - gasp - State of Origin.

Wonderfully, crowds are being tipped for October, too.

With V'landys already in discussions with biosecurity experts about getting you, me and everyone else back into grounds before the year is out, until then, of course, you can always flick on the idiot box.

With confidence, too.

For more than being Australia's first footy code back in action, rugby league is also the most suited for TV screens.

Which again matters.

So blow that whistle and let Jason Taumalolo run wild.

Same deal James Tedesco, Bronson Xerri and whichever young gun is set to come from nowhere to make his name during the rest of 2020.

Get excited, too, about the prospect of St George Illawarra flyer Matt Dufty in space. Or Gold Coaster Jai Arrow in traffic. All of it bloody wonderful.

Especially now that we've seen what happens when rugby league disappears, right? First, anti-vaxxing becomes a thing.

Soon after, referees threaten to walk away.

And all while our superstars make headlines for everything from firearms and front kicks through to freshly choreographed Tik Tok dances.

Worse, have been the weekends.

With the simple truth being that, between trips to Bunnings, you can only watch so many Winfield Cup re-runs before Super Saturday becomes … well, slightly less super.

But now, thankfully, normal viewing has returned. Which isn't to say things won't be missing.

They will.

None more obvious than crowds, a second referee and Nathan Cleary for those first couple of rounds.

But when he gets back?

Understand the Panthers will be no joke. Same deal Canberra. Throw in too those competition-leading Eels, where new halves coach Andrew Johns could prove the year's best buy.

Up in Newcastle, rookie coach Adam O'Brien is off to a flyer. While at Souths, the old bloke has one more crack. All of this, too, before even considering that Dessie Hasler's Sea Eagles outfit boasts a pair of Trbojevic brothers.

Elsewhere, Freddy is gunning for a third-straight Origin series. While Robbo, he wants the first three-peat coach since Big Jack wore a kangaroo coat.

Which Melbourne Storm will be looking to challenge, of course. Just as they always do.

Same as at Wests Tigers, Benji Marshall will be looking to sprinkle whatever magic dust is left.

While at Canterbury, Kieran Foran will be asking the footy gods for nothing more than to stay together.

Certainly you reckon he deserves some luck.

Ditto V'landys and his new ruck rules. Or maybe it's the Warriors who really get the greatest return on all they've given.

Regardless, it's great to have the game back.

KICK-OFF TIME ROUND 3 - THURSDAY MAY 28 SUNCORP STADIUM 7.50PM BRONCOS v EELS
---
NSW Deputy Premier John Barilaro said the NRL must suspend any player who breached COVID-19 health guidelines between now and May 28, warning: "If it happens in the season, the competition will get shut down." A key player in the Project Apollo relaunch, Barilaro revealed the NSW Government would recommend to ARLC chairman Peter V'landys that he suspend any player who breaches distancing protocols during its second "pre-season".

Barilaro also revealed, to ensure players understood the severity of a wrong action, that he would suspend Penrith halfback Nathan Cleary for the rest of the season after having twice appeared before the NRL integrity unit this week.

While Cleary was not fined by NSW Police for having a group of women inside his home, Barilaro said the fact the NSW Origin star failed to initially disclose several social media videos that were eventually aired represented "broken trust".

It is understood the NRL could announce further sanctions against Cleary today. "If the NRL competition gets signed off, the cost of any (social-distancing) breach after May 28 will be significant," Barilaro told The Daily Telegraph.

"And I'm not talking financial cost. If a player breaches guidelines once the competition starts, it will get shut down. It's that simple." This week, Barilaro suggested that he was happy with the $44,000 dished out in monetary sanctions against NRL superstars Cleary, Latrell Mitchell and Josh Addo-Carr.

Mitchell and Addo-Carr were filmed camping, shooting and riding motorbikes on the South Sydney fullback's property near Taree on the mid north coast.

"And at the time, they were fair," he said.

"But now we find out Nathan Cleary didn't own up to everything he did. "Things were kept hidden.

"And I can't forgive that.

"So while I hate saying it, I think he should be stood down for the rest of the season. A clear message needs to be sent." And why?

"To get the NRL season up and running, we must have trust," he said. "Yes, there are the naysayers out there who don't want to see this rugby league restart happen.

"But for those of us who have been strong supporters, the message has always been 'trust us, trust us, trust us'.

"But when players do the wrong thing, it's lost.

"They broke the trust we are asking everyone to give us. Which is why a strong message needs to be sent right across the competition to every single player, reaffirming the importance of doing the right thing." Elsewhere, Barilaro said he expected Australian Border Security to give the Warriors an exemption to travel into the country from New Zealand and begin training from Monday at their new home base in Tamworth, The Deputy Premier again confirmed that the Aucklanders would be allowed to train as a team while in quarantine.

"We've signed off on that," he said.

"We're now just waiting for Border Force."But the Warriors can start training on Monday."
---
PERTH's newly minted mus-eum has removed a reference to China from its COVID-19 exhibit after a complaint from the Chinese consul -general.

The Western Australian Museum Boola Bardip multimedia display had described coronavirus as "originating in mainland China".

WA Museum chief executive Alec Coles confirmed there had been a complaint. "The museum was … contacted by the acting consul-general in Perth about the factual errors, and we were pleased to advise the mistakes were immediately rectified," he said.

The museum has also changed a reference to the -island of Taiwan being -independent.

"A map has been updated to reflect Australian government policy," the museum said on social media.

The exhibit is housed in the Tianqi Lithium Collections Gallery, named after the Chinese mining company which donated $5 million to the museum in 2017.

Members of the mining company's board attended the Central Party School of the Chinese Communist Party, which is a university for the country's leaders.

In a social media post, the museum said it sought -"authenticity and accuracy" in all work. "One label stated that COVID-19 originated in mainland China," the mus-eum said. "The World Health Organisation is still investigating its origin, therefore this reference has been -updated." Australia has recognised Taiwan as being part of China since 1972.
---
IN a decisive move against Beijing sympathisers in his own ranks, Anthony Albanese has vowed any future government he leads will shun China's Belt and Road Initiative.

It comes as the health minister said revelations a prominent Australian scientist believes it was possible the coronavirus was created in a Wuhan lab is "precisely why" an independent inquiry into the virus' origins is needed.

Labor remains wracked with division on China, with Mr Albanese moving to distance himself from the controversial Belt and Road Initiative, while his agriculture spokesman Joel Fitzgibbon defended his claim the Morrison government was "demonising" Beijing.

However, the Opposition leader yesterday refused to criticise Victorian premier Daniel Andrews for last year signing a deal with Beijing.

"A government I led would not be signing up to the Belt and Road Initiative," he said.

The controversial initiative is Beijing's strategic vehicle for investment in dozens of countries around the world.

Mr Albanese said the federal government had no grounds to criticise Mr Andrews given their past selling the Port of Darwin.

Mr Fitzgibbon continued his assault on Scott Morrison.

"All I've been doing is standing up for the national interest and Australian jobs," Mr Fitzgibbon told Sky News.

"It was just unnecessary for our prime minister to run out ahead of everyone else … if you're going to have an inquiry anyway, and we were always going to do just that, why use such intemperate language against your largest trading partner?" Nationals senator Bridget McKenzie said Mr Fitzgibbon needed to clarify if he was on Australia's side.

"Joel needs to get on board Team Australia or is he backing other Labor entities such as Daniel Andrews by putting the Chinese interest above Australia's," she said.

It came as Mr Hunt revealed Australian officials are already working with the World Health Organisation to get an independent COVID-19 inquiry started, insisting it was up to "disease detectives" to determine the origin of the deadly virus. The Daily Telegraph yesterday revealed that prominent scientist, Flinders University's Professor Nikolai Petrovsky, believes it should be "considered a possibility" the virus escaped from the Wuhan Institute of Virology.
---
The NRL's strict COVID-19 bubble requirements this season meant the usually plentiful off-field pro-perty movements of star players were limited.

Listings and sales remained scarce although the Dally M Medal winner and NSW Origin player Jack Wighton and his partner Monisha Lew-Fatt made a mid-season play when they bought their first home -together.

There's plenty of space for the couple on the 3ha estate at Bywong, in the NSW Southern Tablelands. It was marketed as a holiday at home, with the -potential to ride horses and bikes, camp, fish, catch yabbies and play cricket.

The 1970s renovated home that has six bedrooms, three bathrooms, two living areas and two outside entertaining areas cost around $1.1 million.

Having grown up in Orange, Wighton, 27, made his debut for the Raiders in 2012 and has played 172 games since, scoring 54 tries.

Back in Sydney Parramatta Eels playmaker Mitch Moses turned his attention to his real estate portfolio three times this year including in the weeks following the end of season. He offloaded his former Epping home earlier this month.

The Winifred Ave property only hit the listing websites for a handful of days before being sold. He was asking $1.9 million. Moses paid $1,375,000 for the three-bedroom home in 2015 when he was at the Tigers.

Back in April Moses spent $1.8 million on a 1940s home in Gladesville, buying back into the area having also sold -quietly in Ryde for $2,099,000 in February.

Sydney Rooster Jake Friend recently accepted a $1.58 million offer on his Randwick investment. Coming with city skyline views from its Frenchmans Rd vantage point, Friend bought it for $1.32 million in 2017.
---
RUGBY league is in a sweet spot. Each weekend the -standard seems to get better and better.

Last week's Roosters-Storm match was an epic.

It was the biggest test of the rule adjustments, two of the most disciplined defensive teams that control play-the-ball speed better than any others. If there was a game which was going to return to a grinding centrefield struggle, it was that one.

It was anything but. It was fast, free-flowing and didn't lose any of the physicality this contest always serves up.

The reward for the rapid-fire tempo was the most eventful final 10 minutes I've witnessed, both sides fatigued and left vulnerable to -whoever held possession.

Accentuating how well our competition is travelling is the fact that the AFL is suffering a serious downturn in quality as far as spectator entertainment is concerned and Australian rugby union is picking up the pieces of a -horror few years.

I declare my bias but I believe we are heading into a golden period. The question is, what do we do with it?

I know I bang on about this repeatedly, but are we really doing enough to increase our presence in the Pacific? I fear we've grown complacent.

Pacific nations are potentially the game's greatest talent pool, if they aren't already.

The rise and rise of Tonga has been a gift to the game, but we have to look to build on it even further. Tonga deserves more than just the odd match here and there.

Likewise, Fiji, Samoa and the only place where rugby league is the national sport, Papua New Guinea.

Maika Sivo, Suliasi Vunivalu and Viliame Kikau's images should be everywhere across Fiji, promoting them and in turn - the game.

Every time I watch the Fiji Test team play, it improves.

Our goal should be to have Fiji challenging the Kangaroos in the same vein as Tonga regularly does.

At first I was excited by the concept of the All Blacks-Kangaroos hybrid game. The Kangaroos have been a victim of their own dominance.

Taking on the All Blacks could give us the respect we deserve as a sporting entity. But do we really need it?

Particularly at this time, while our game is flying and the All Blacks are a world brand, I think there are better ways to put our sport on the world stage.

The Rugby League World Cup is in England at the end of next season and there's an opportunity to do something big.

The pause in the competition during the COVID-19 -crisis was used as an opportunity to experiment, change a few things and see what happened.

It's been a revelation, and at last we have an administrator who is willing to take risks.

So what can we do with the game's greatest asset, State of Origin, to build it further and possibly make it bigger?

The week before next year's World Cup kicks off, let's play an additional Origin match in England.

Keep the three-game series in the middle of the year but have a stand-alone match before the World Cup.

What's at stake for the players? How about $70,000 per player for the winning team and nothing for the -losers. State of Origin - winner takes all.

Kangaroos coach Mal Meninga would then pick his Australian World Cup team. Those not selected could possibly play a Great Britain side consisting of players who were not picked in the British World Cup teams.

You would take the game to Manchester's Old Trafford - in England's North, rugby league heartland.

Speaking to several rugby league people over there, -including Warrington Wolves owner and leading music promoter Simon Moran, they have no doubt it would sell out quickly.

But it's not just about us. English rugby league fans are some of the most loyal supporters you will find in sport. The game needs a boost there and it would certainly do that.
---
Fears for a nation being torn apart Reading both Andrew Bolt and Tim Blair's poignant articles on the civil unrest in America (1/6), I'm reminded of an observation my father once made that the USA had both the best and worst of everything.

How true that sentiment has proved in recent days. Whereas thousands of pairs of hands rightly applauded healthcare workers for their efforts in dealing with COVID-19, those restless hands are now destroying the livelihoods of shop owners and seeking to attack the very people - black and white - who are called upon in a time of emergency to preserve human life.

Why has this recent tragedy been perceived by the masses in various cities as granting a seal of approval to reduce the property of others to ruins?

Is the best way to respond to police incompetence really by razing local infrastructure, graffitiing public buildings, raiding convenience stores and stealing electronic goods?

I greatly fear America will further retreat into a toxic tribalism, where citizens are suspicious of each other and the worst is assumed about the men and women who serve in the often volatile vocation that is public law enforcement.

Peter Waterhouse, Craigieburn

" "" The violence and looting under the guise of protest is doing nothing to honour the memory of George Floyd.

If anything, it is reinforcing the stereotype of why police come down hard in some areas (although there is no excusing illegal police behaviour).

Mr Floyd's avoidable death was an absolute disgrace, but stealing from and destroying the businesses of innocent people, is abhorrent and has nothing to do with racism.

K Baker, Engadine

Lab security is an issue globally - not just China I was somewhat alarmed after reading Sharri Markson's virus origins story, where it was revealed that "accidents do occur" in the world of security of sensitive biological agents (Lab leaks happen: former spy chief, 1/6).

Nothing is proven, but it appears the Wuhan virus outbreak could be centred around the Wuhan Institute of Virology, but what is equally disturbing appears to be the fact that other "accidents" have happened at "level 4" facilities globally.

As stated, any review or probe of the Wuhan virus should encompass all such biosecurity laboratories, worldwide.

It's not good enough that lax containment measures and breaches of security protocols in these types of facilities, can and have endangered the world.

Peter Cattlin, Freshwater

Beijing's mangled message I love some of the phrases coming out of the Chinese Communist Party these days. Australians being chewing gum on a Chinese shoe was nicely graphic and the image of Australia as a kangaroo that is actually a species of American canine, while convoluted, was also beguiling.

However, currently running in first place for the Mangled-Message Cup, the state-run Global Times invented a fascinating take on US foreign policy describing it as so extreme as to be "nothing less than chronic suicide" (Pro-China supporters see red over US sanctions, 1/6).

Repetitively committing suicide would be an astounding feat in itself but it's the reassuring little "nothing less than" that takes the cake - like people promising you they are telling you the "literal truth".

Robert T. Walker, Wagga Wagga

Walking on eggshells There was really no need for a new report to show that our universities have only themselves to blame for putting all their "financial eggs" into the foreign student basket (Universities learning a harsh lesson of their own: report 1/6).

Even high school business studies students are taught about the risks of 'too many eggs in one basket' strategy.

Steve Ngeow, Chatswood

Wanted: intellectual rigour The Western world is reaping what we have sown by not fighting to stop emotions, ideologies and immature egos elbow aside facts, logic and good science.

No longer bastions of free speech, our universities suspend people like academic Peter Ridd and student protester Drew Pavlou for speaking out against unjust or unscientific activities.

Reasoned public debate is nigh on impossible on subjects like climate and energy as those opposing the orthodoxy are sneered at, de-platformed or simply ignored by much of the press and academia, irrespective of the quality of their arguments.

And now in the US, legitimate anger and disgust at some police brutality has been turned into an excuse for looting, arson, violence and abuse of political opponents, often under the umbrella of "protest".

The root cause of these and many other social ills is the lack of intellectual rigour in our schools, universities and society where facts and reason are too often subordinated to opinions, emotions and the blaming of others for personal inadequacies. In short, it's time for societies everywhere to grow up and face reality again.

Doug Hurst, Chapman, ACT

Leading by example Where are we, at a Dutch auction, or is it just political buy-off? Offering our frontline workers $1000-a-head as 'hush-money' is hardly the way to govern at a time when the government needs to show strength and determination (Pay of peace, 1/6). It's a time for tough leadership, not tap dancing and compromise.

Premier Gladys Berejiklian could have avoided this situation had she set the example by having her political colleagues and senior bureaucrats take a 10-20 per cent pay cut for 12 months - it's called leading by example.

With this behind her she could have more easily justified the deferral of the public sector wage increase.

John George, Terrigal

Time for Oz-buy law Recent events have led businesses and governments to question their over reliance on China, in the supply chain of required materials and stock.

Simply put, Australia needs to supply Australia. How?

Simple. Make governments buy Australian made goods (Treasurer tells bean counters buy Aussie, 30/5). Set a mandatory level of local procurement for all supplies. Tenders could be called for all goods. Set a target, for example a 50 per cent supply within five years.

Yes the products will cost more than cheaper imports but the money will circulate throughout the economy, providing jobs, taxes, profits, economic independence and national pride.

For instance, every piece of government furniture, for schools and office should be made in Australia of recycled plastics. This would be a beginning in using our abundance of plastic waste.

Let's start there and move on to all the myriad of government- bought product. Peter Franklin, Byron Bay Briefly … NRL supporters have been quick to blame referees over the years for their performances. Over the weekend the standard of refereeing with one referee was first class. Well done to everyone involved.

Glenn Copson, Eglinton

" "" Talk about pent up frustrations over lockdowns (Ignited States of America, 1/6). The bleeding obvious no one has mentioned - it is why they have gone nuts and now let's see how many get the virus with their group protests.

Sandra, Leichhardt " "" Rioting, violence, arson, looting are not protesting - these are criminal acts and should be treated as such (Ignited States of America, 1/6).

Peter Wilcox, Blayney " "" Ben Fordham is a brilliant replacement for Alan Jones. Loved his first up interview with PM Scott Morrison. Asked to comment on what was happening in America, the PM wisely said Martin Luther King would not have been into the rioting - that should satisfy left and right Geoff Hinds, Merrylands

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
A massive deficit for the future Circumstances are a little more serious than the GFC but still, the spending of the Morrison government makes former Prime Minister Kevin Rudd's much criticised handouts look miserly. Indeed, some handouts have been so long- standing and generous that many recipients stood down from work prefer not to return, even though employers need workers to come back.

Workers and taxpayers who are obliged to pay back this debt in 10 years ahead might look differently on this so-called heroic spending.

Brian Whybrow, Wanniassa, ACT

The Treasurer will soon unveil Australia's largest budget deficit since World War II.

I find this funny. The Government can still control and reduce the size of deficit by not spending too much. For starters, just reduce the too generous JobKeeper payment.

Mokhles Sidden, Strathfield

Words of wisdom from former PM Great wisdom from Tony Abbott (Actually, all lives matter, 23/7): "If you don't understand the things that have shaped the culture in which you live, it's very hard to navigate properly." BLM protesters lay claim to superior moral virtue, but many weep false tears, perhaps offending their own moral sensibilities.  They pay little attention to past choices, have little knowledge of Australian history, and march for Western civilisation nihilism.

It's important to examine the past and present achievements of Aboriginal Australians.

They are well respected and have equality.

Ron Brown, Ballina

Leaners and lifters The article by Jessica McSweeney that relates to JobKeeper keeping tourist towns afloat, is an interesting one (Coronavirus NSW: Areas with the highest JobKeeper rates, 23/7).

On a trip last week, I was in both Byron Bay and Coffs Harbour. I had dinner at two relatively large venues in both towns and was amazed that virtually all of the wait staff were Europeans, not Australians Both managers told me, in no unspecific terms, that their usual staff were on $750 a week, $1500 a fortnight and did not want to work.

Both said they expect them to float back when JobSeeker finishes, and both said in so many words "no way José, they've let me down badly".

Such is the state of play in two of the largest NSW coastal towns and, no doubt, this plays out all over Australia. Best draw your own conclusions about JobSeeker creating a new class of leaners not lifters John Partridge, Manly

Flight of fancy End of an era (Boeing, Boeing, Gone: No more Sydney from a 747, 22/7). No mention of the 747 SP (special performance) variant which must have been struck from the inventory years ago.

I had many flights on the shortened "pocket rocket" and pilots fondly regarded it as a hot dog, or a "stubby puppy". Time travels fast.

It was over 60 years ago when Qantas phased in the new 707.

Mike Fogarty, Weston, AC

Viral outcome With regard to the planned Black Lives Matter protests next week, it is time every state government showed how fair dinkum they are in protecting all of us from the coronavirus.

There should be fines and jail terms for the organisers.

If they don't then there truly is one rule for some and another for the rest of us.

Peter Wilcox, Blayney

Not a viable option I question the financial benefits of proceeding with the Narrabri gas project (Gas project debate dominated by lots of hot air, 23/7).  Investing further in gas is a risky economic move when fossil fuel investments globally are not doing well; in the past fortnight, Origin Energy and Santos have both announced billion-dollar write-offs due to collapse in global gas prices.

Moreover, the Australian Energy Market Operator and CSIRO have already determined that solar and wind are the cheapest forms of new generation and when paired with storage solutions like pumped hydro are already price competitive with gas. Why opt for a solution that will endanger our aquifers, spoil productive agricultural land and is an emissions nightmare?

Gas simply costs too much for potentially so little gain. .

Jasper Lee, Ashfield

Cheap power for China Those planning our post-COVID-19 world must consider the Chinese coal boom that sees 250 gigawatts of additional coal-fired power plants either under construction or planned.

This will lift Chinese coal consumption to more than four times that of India where large increases are also planned.

Coal is still king in much of Asia, where governments obviously understand that CO2 plays a minor part at best in climate change and they can burn coal with impunity without threatening their future.

A cynic might conclude that having shut down industry in much of the world with a virus originating in their country, the Chinese now plan to gain the advantage with cheap power unacceptable to much of the gullible west. We should not let this happen here.

Doug Hurst, Chapman, ACT

Panda-monium I think the only person rubbing his hands with glee at the pandemic his country caused is Xi Jinping. The world is in economic decline, people are dying in the thousands, the US is in disarray and there are massive job losses. If you didn't know better, you would think this was some kind of master plan orchestrated by China to swallow up smaller countries indebted to the Communist rule.

The smiling Panda couldn't be that clever, could he?

Janice Russell, Malua Bay

Cooking with gas We read Mr Zinn's (Gas project debate dominated by lots of hot air, 23/7) with interest.

We've been gas stove users ourselves. For a long time, we resisted change because we loved cooking with gas for its instant heat.  We finally made the switch to an electric cooktop when we learnt about the respiratory (health) impacts and air pollution created from using gas.

The induction cooktop is much easier to keep clean and turns out to be just as responsive as gas. As we have solar panels and were able to disconnect the gas, the savings on our household bills has been immense.

To all those gas connected homes in NSW, we would encourage you to switch away from gas for the sake of your health, time and budget, if not for the environment.

Tom and Evelyn Hunt, Oak Flats

Briefly ...

What a fitting final tribute, to fly the kangaroo on radar by the last Qantas 747 en route to the US (That's a real roo route, 23/7). Just as well it wasn't that stupid wattle emblem; it would be unrecognisable, in every sense of the word.

David Goon Pan, Cronulla * * * The fight against the dire COVID-19 is all encompassing. Hence, the flip side to Victorian Premier Dan Andrews plays the blame game (Editorial 23/7) is the sound observation that 'any time you're busy fixing blame, you're wasting time and energy and not fixing the problem'.

Steve Ngeow, Chatswood * * * You can get it chanting, you can get it marching, you can get it taking a knee. As a matter of fact, BLM ... you're flirting with COVID-19.

Leo Arathoon, Salamander Bay * * * If you want to preserve the name of the landmark Captain Cook Hotel at Paddington (Take a Captain Cook at this lunacy, 23/7), just stay away until the Marxists retreat.

Patrick Hennessy, Penshurst * * * With regard to the letter (Pension not pain, 23/7), if D. Cooper is able to do everything he/she claims to do on the old age pension, then I think he/she should be running for the Treasurer's position at the next election.

Pam Duffy, Oatley

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
Let's Cook up interest in history It shouldn't come as a surprise that young people get Captain James Cook mixed up with Captain Arthur Phillip, thinking he was part of the First Fleet (Lasting impact of a brief encounter, 29/4).

Even a former National Party deputy leader Bridget McKenzie once stated while in support of Australia Day remaining as a holiday on January 26 that it was the day Cook landed in Australia.

If senior political leaders don't know this important aspect of our history we have a problem, whereby we are possibly not concentrating enough on Australian history.

As someone from a Greek background, Kurnell, the landing place of Captain Cook was the location where many Greek immigrant families during the 1960s and 70s spent Australia Day having picnics and acknowledging the importance of Cook.

Con Vaitsas, Ashbury

"" " Congratulations to The Daily Telegraph for its coverage of the James Cook anniversary (Lasting impact of a brief encounter, 29/4).

We can learn a lot from history. Remember, we can't change it. Let's not forget that being the first European to sight the east coast of Australia was like us now going into space.

Cook's ship the Endeavour was damaged on the Great Barrier Reef and if it had not made it back to England, Australia would have a completely different history.

In 1970, with no COVID-19 hysteria, the Cook anniversary was a big deal. Joe Kovac, Prestons

Doco gives left leaners plenty Moore to digest After reading Miranda Devine's opinion article (For the Greenies, less is Michael Moore, 29/4), I took time out in isolation to look at Planet Of The Humans on YouTube. It was the best 100 minutes I have spent in a long time.

I would urge all Australians to look at this film, especially those Australians and politicians who are suggesting our nation should adopt a 100 per cent renewable energy scheme.

It exposes this green con and the billionaires who will derive financial gains if green energy is adopted.

For the first time the left-wing has shown some transparency on this subject. If Mike Moore was a Pom he would be knighted.

Bruce Rollo, Wollongbar

Powering up electric cars The criticism of the electric car industry in Michael Moore's new documentary is quite surprising (For the Greenies, less is Michael Moore - Miranda Devine, 29/4).

Sure, battery-powered cars are only as clean as the source of electricity they use.

Of course, if they were introduced 20 years ago, their effective carbon emissions would have been indistinguishable from internal-combustion engine cars.

However, with the fast improvement in solar and wind-energy technology, 20 years from now electric cars will realistically allow for widespread, cheap, low-emission private transport.

This is not to mention the fact that electric vehicles will make Australia independent from the need for oil importation. The technology seems like something worth working on.

Simone Belli, Wollstonecraft

Water we waiting for?

It was great to see a list of the projects to get the NSW economy back on track (On a fast track to rebuilding our state, 29/4).

But I failed to see one particular item - there was no mention of dams or water harvesting.

Maybe that's because water is a country issue and not a Sydney one - and not a worry now until the next drought.

Colin Bailey, Heathcote

Wisdom of kid with a smile We seem to all be bemoaning the fact we have to stay in our homes and we can't go to the beach or we are holed up in four star hotels while we come to grips with defeating this pandemic.

Then in contrast to all this doom and gloom, we turn to Page 15 of The Daily Telegraph on Monday and this little chap leaps off the page and into our hearts, more concerned about his mum than the pain and suffering he has endured (Smile that's star quality, 29/4).

We all should learn from six-year-old cancer survivor Chase Green and stop the finger pointing and blame game.

As country legend Tom T Hall says in that great song, "God bless little children while they're still too young to hate".

Don Rodgers, Warragai Creek

Future needs funding now We have $162 billion in the nation's Future Fund. The object of this fund is to strengthen the nation's long-term financial position. This is taxpayers' money stored up for some mythical future. Indeed, it is a worthy cause but the future has arrived with a bang and it is grim.

There is no better time to invest this money in infrastructure projects that will employ people and benefit the nation for decades to come.

Ray Armstrong, Tweed Heads South

Evacuate fatal facility Australian hearts must surely be going out to relatives of the 11 elderly residents of the Newmarch House nursing home near Penrith, who have died from the coronavirus pandemic sweeping much of the world.

Surely this establishment, which has seemingly become a death trap, should be evacuated ASAP before more families get the bad news that one of their cherished relatives has succumbed to the coronavirus.

Eric Palm, Gympie, Qld

Letting down the side The NRL's failure to adequately punish their errant players has let down the general public, the returned soldiers who couldn't march on Anzac Day, those elderly citizens who can't see their families, those who cannot give a loved one a proper funeral, those 18 and 21-year-olds who cannot have a proper birthday party celebration and the medical staff who take care of everyone (Big fines for guns & posers, 29/4).

Finally, they have let down the people who support and love the game of rugby league who have seen that support being trivialised by certain players who couldn't care less about their fellow citizens.

Peter Wilcox, Blayney

Dealing with a global brat I fully agree with your editorial piece (China turns off the charm, 29/4). The Chinese regime seems to be behaving like a spoiled brat caught with his hand in the coronavirus cookie jar.

The threat from the Chinese ambassador to boycott trade with Australia over the proposed independent inquiry into the origins of the coronavirus crisis strongly suggests China has something serious to hide.

China appears to have adopted the same almost paranoiac attitude that it shows when human rights officials seek to investigate the treatment of Tibetans, whose country was taken over forcefully, or the Uighur people, who have been rounded up and confined to "re-education" camps.

President Xi must be convinced by the West that the path he is taking will lead only to great harm on both sides of the battle.

Douglas Mackenzie, Deakin, ACT

Briefly … Miranda Devine and James Morrow have hit the nail on the head (opinion columns, 29/4). The Chinese Communist Party (CPP) have demonstrated they are simply nasty bullies. It's time for Australia to take back those parts of our country we have stupidly allowed to be sold off or long-term leased to disguised entities which are simply fronts for the CPP.

Peter Cattlin, Freshwater "" " The Roosters copped a fair bit of flak for letting go of Latrell Mitchell but it has become obvious they were well ahead of the critics. Good luck to the Rabbits.

Mick Evans, Park Ridge, Qld "" " After talking tough, the NRL has let Latrell Mitchell and Josh Addo-Carr off with a fine of a fraction of their earnings. They should have been banned for the rest of the year.

Brian Whybrow, Wanniassa, ACT

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily TelegraphGPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
Medallist could be Origin key That 22-year-old Melbourne Storm fullback and this year's Clive Churchill medallist Ryan Papenhuyzen has been included in the NSWBlues squad to take on the Queensland Maroons in the first State of Origin match to be played at the Adelaide Oval on November 4 could prove to be a masterstroke by Blues coach Brad Fittler (Slight stature but immense impact as Paps hits next level, 26/10).

Papenhuyzen has been a revelation this season, and is undoubtedly one of the contributing factors in the Melbourne Storm having won the 2020 grand final at ANZ Stadium on Sunday night by defeating the minor premiers, the valiant Penrith Panthers.

For the first time in many years I have total confidence in the Blues winning all three Origin matches by comfortably beating the Maroons team coached by Wayne Bennett.

Eric Palm, Gympie, Queensland "" " When I am under pressure and things don't go my way in the workplace, can I have the same rights as Craig Bellamy does in the coaching booth please?

We're talking the right to go "full crazy" here - the type of Ren & Stimpy Show theatrics, you know, neck muscles bulging with eyes popping out of their sockets screaming into the microphone then Kung Fu kicking a chair.

Great viewing for the kiddies don't you think? Leaves you wondering, is there a sin bin for coaches?

Robert Brown, Davistown

Strip search victims deserve full government backing All Australians should be outraged at the abhorrent treatment of 13 of our women in Qatar in the last few days (Women in strip search outrage, 26/10).

The federal government must voice its outrage in the strongest of terms. Our citizens have a right to expect safe and unhindered travel throughout the world.

They certainly have a right to be treated with privacy, respect and dignity. The victims of this deprivation of liberty and decency are entitled to a formal apology, if not financial compensation from the Qatar authorities. The federal government must insist on this happening.

John George, Terrigal

Qatar to pay the price When we can travel overseas again, it might be worth remembering the gross, offensive, embarrassing and invasive treatment that some women were subjected to by over- zealous staff on the tarmac of Doha airport (Women in strip search outrage, 26/10).

This behaviour would not be tolerated here and we wouldn't expect it anywhere else.

Future travels through Qatar might now be off tourists' plans. Marg Swindells, Castle Hill

Not the time for greed How many of the people who have lost their jobs due to the pandemic would love to earn the money these CFMEU types are earning now but, typical, the union heavies want more and more (Building union's 'gouge', 26/10).

They don't care that we are already, as a country, on our knees looking for a way up out of this COVID-19 plight. They are just greedy thugs.

Pat, Narara

It takes more than words Great reflection on the changing of the meaning of specific words, Tim Blair (Leftist war on words - column, 26/10).

Over the last 20 years we have witnessed major changes within our cultural, educational, political, and communications institutions.

Sure, words have been mightier than the sword in the advancement of equal rights, same-sex unions and individual freedoms.

But we are now witnessing daily 'superior moral voices' playing hypocrite in order to change past moral choices.

We must decide on our choices and newer pathways in pursuit of contented relationships, satisfactory employment and a safer united multicultural Australia.

Words are an important part of change - actions, however, require acceptance. R. Brown, Ballina

Horse sense not present Since 1861 the Melbourne Cup has been the race that stops a nation, and packs a racecourse - but not this year (Cup will be empty without a crowd, 26/10).

The only people at the track self- distancing will be horses and jockeys. The Victorian government has rejected the Victoria Racing Club submission to host a small crowd within public health guidelines.

This comes at a time when large crowds in NSW and Queensland watched football grand finals.

For the time being horse sense in Victoria seems to be off the menu. Peter Penglis, Kambah, ACT Worst is yet to come My biggest concern for Victoria is that the destruction is only about to begin after these lockdowns are lifted. How many of these small businesses can survive or are ready to be declared bankrupt?

Victoria is a basketcase with no good outcome foreseeable, being led by clueless politicians.

Stephen, Online

A question of balance Memo to Victorian Premier Daniel Andrews - living with COVID-19 requires dealing with balancing both the health and economic fronts.

The World Health Organisation's advice to limit using lockdowns to fight the pandemic is straight from the horse's mouth and ready for Dan Andrews' urgent consumption.

Steve Ngeow, Chatswood

A question of balance Really? Cameron Smith the greatest player of all time? I don't think so! I can think of dozens of players better. It's no wonder he has played over 400 games and not been injured. He rarely runs with the ball, is invariably last into a tackle - and last out. Maybe those shouting his praises mean he's the greatest ball distributor, which he may well be.

Phil Little, Mittagong

Hot end put on hold Drought-breaking rain with more to come, dams full to overflowing, two thirds of the way through spring and maximum temperatures of 16C.

No wonder the alarmists have abandoned the phrase "global warming" as their mantra in prophesying the end of the world as we know it.

Brent Hedges, Manly

Clean up dirty politics One cannot help but concur with Paul Sobb re the accusations against Gladys Berejiklian (Private life is not the key - Letters, 24/10). Unless she can be proven to have assisted Daryl Maguire in his alleged dealings then the subject should be closed.

The Opposition's call for her to step down is thus unfair. It is part of what seems to be endemic in politics at all levels.

If you are in opposition, attacking the morals and character of governing members, in order to (hopefully) persuade the public to vote against them, seems a common and distasteful practice.

Ms Berejiklian has had a failed relationship which may in itself be distressing and she does not deserve ridicule for it.

I might point out that personal relationships in this country are not illegal. Vilification is.

Selma Behm, Gosford

Briefly … These days, so many people act like they are the star of their own reality TV show, gracelessly pushing themselves forward to be noticed. Bonza, Fairfield, Victoria "" " Do the construction union leaders have any brains (Building union's 'gouge', 26/10)? Australia is in a recession due to the COVID pandemic and you want a 15 per cent pay rise. What a hide you have.

Dazza, Singleton "" " Save Victoria - Peter V'landys for Premier!

Cookie, Sawtell "" " The golf course bunker and the NRL bunker are similar - they are both hazards to be avoided.

G. Hutton, Saratoga

HAVE YOUR SAYMAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
THE COVID FILES SNUBBED MAGNATE DEFENDS CHINA STANCE

THE controversy over And-rew Forrest's China connections escalated yesterday when a cancer funding ann-ouncement with the Health Minister was cancelled amid disturbing revelations about the Chinese genomic company which supplied COVID-19 test kits to the billionaire's charity.

Mr Forrest and Health Minister Greg Hunt were due to visit Melbourne's Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, to announce a $67 million package for kids with cancer.

But the event was called off at late notice and a joint -statement released instead in which Mr Hunt praised the mining magnate's Minderoo Foundation.

Government MPs earlier blasted Mr Forrest for inviting China's Victorian Consul-General Long Zhou to speak unannounced at a press conference with Mr Hunt on Wednesday, at a time when -relations between the two countries are frayed over Australia's call for an independent coronavirus probe.

But Mr Forrest yesterday denied that he was acting against the interests of Australia by giving a voice to a Chinese Communist Party official, citing Mr Zhou's help securing personal protective equipment and 10 million testing kits for all Australians.

"I'm the most Australian person I know … I put Australia first," he said. "I run the -oranges out to the game for Australia, not China or America …," Mr Forrest said.

"China stepped up so I brought the Consul-General along when we broke the back of the PPE crisis in Perth."  To add to the controversy, Mr Forrest's Chinese partner in supplying the COVID-19 test kits is the Beijing Genomics Institute (BGI), whose president once boasted of a corporate culture verging on eugenics.

In a panel discussion in 2018, Wang Jian declared that BGI staff are forbidden to have children with birth defects.

"If they were born with defects, it would be a disgrace to all 7000 staff," Mr Wang said, according to an English translation by Shanghai United Media publication Sixth Tone.

Mr Wang declared that none of the 1400 babies born to company employees have defects.

Employees also are not -allowed to have heart bypass surgery but must rely on "gene tech and clean living to prevent cardiovascular disease". BGI also tracks the dining habits of employees and has disabled its elevators.

Mr Forrest and wife Nicola helped secure the Chinese-made test kits through their charitable Minderoo Foundation for use across Australia.

The kits give the nation's largest pathology providers Sonic Healthcare and Healius greater capacity to test for COVID-19 as part of a threefold increase in total daily testing capability.

The Minderoo Foundation also has secured 100,000 nasal swabs for use in COVID-19 testing, which will augment existing supplies.

Long-stemmed swabs already procured by the government in China are incompatible with the existing Australian pathology supply chain, according to Victorian manufacturing sources.

They are too long to fit into the Australian standard sterile tube and the snap point on the shaft is in the wrong place. Clinicians in Victoria are understood to be concerned that the shaft has to be forcibly snapped leaving a jagged edge that could pierce gloves.

"This has become dangerous for clinicians as they struggle to break the swab shaft elsewhere while attempting to ensure that the snapped shaft, potentially coated in COVID-19 rich mucous, does not pierce scarce PPE and risk infection of the -clinician or nurse," said the source.

It is not known what sized swab Mr Forrest has secured.

Meanwhile, Sydney Chinese consul-general Gu Xiaoji yesterday launched a new PR offensive to deflect blame over the origins of the virus.

"Wuhan laboratory has nothing to do with the origin of the novel coronavirus," the office tweeted.

A spokesman for the Sydney consulate also issued a statement on its website claiming it was "impossible" the virus could have escaped from a Chinese laboratory.

"The research facility is a biosafety level 4 laboratory that is able to deal with the world's deadliest pathogens," the spokesman claimed.

US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo yesterday praised Australia's call for an independent inquiry into the origins of the coronavirus.

It comes after China's ruling Communist Part angrily dismissed Canberra's calls. Mr Pompeo, who has piled pressure on China over the pandemic, waded into the dispute as he sarcastically said that Australia upset Beijing through its "temerity" to ask questions. "Who in the world wouldn't want an investigation of how this happened to the world?" Pompeo told -reporters in Washington.  "The solution to this crisis will come from freedom-loving people around the world."While we know this -started in Wuhan, China, we don't yet know from where it started and despite our best efforts to get experts on the ground, they continue to try to hide."
---
SPECIAL INVESTIGATION: FRIGHTENING REALITY BEHIND RUGBY LEAGUE'S BRUTAL INJURY CRISIS An ambulance pulls up at the SCG on Thursday night to rush champion Sydney Roosters -playmaker Luke Keary to hospital. Mitch -Aubusson suffers a -broken wrist. Lachlan Lam limps off with syndesmosis.

Next door in the Storm sheds, Melbourne winger Suliasi Vunivalu has a fractured jaw. He needs -surgery and a metal plate.

This is rugby league carnage. Fewer scrums, fewer penalties and fewer stoppages have increased the intensity of what was already the most brutal body-contact footy code on the planet.

The Roosters are already missing Boyd Cordner, Jared Waerea--Hargreaves, Angus Crichton, Victor Radley, Brett Morris, Anthony Tupou and Sam Verrills and their hopes of a premiership three-peat are fading fast. That's $5 million and more than half of their salary cap out injured.

Luckily, Keary is not as seriously hurt as first feared. He'll be back in two weeks.

Coach Trent Robinson says he's not complaining, despite the crisis. "The game's faster, there's more ball in play and the intensity has gone up," he said. "The demands on players have increased by a significant amount but we haven't had the training time to adjust to it.

"You've got to pay the price in some way. We've got a better product but more injuries. We've just got to get on with it." A Saturday Telegraph investigation reveals major injuries to NRL stars have increased by an alarming 69 per cent in two years under the brutal impact of rule changes, fatigue and a tougher playing schedule.

The frightening intensity of the modern game has left 86 players with major injuries (out for five weeks or longer) this year -including shocking concussions, -season-ending knee injuries and high-grade muscle strains.

Sports science experts put the crippling toll down to a number of reasons, including: ■ The furious pace of the game, fewer stoppages and more fatigue from the six-again rule; ■ Same-day interstate flights and long-distance bus trips that have -affected sleep, rest and recovery; ■ Moving from isolation training in home gyms in May to full game mode in three weeks; ■ No byes or stand-alone Origin weekends to rest and recover from niggling injuries; ■ The lack of additional high--performance facilities outside of the bubble; and ■ The poor condition of playing surfaces earlier in the year at Campbelltown, Bankwest Stadium and, more recently, in Townsville.

The Roosters are not a one-off. Look at the battered and broken bodies across the NRL.

Most experts believe the COVID lockdown had the most impact on players' overall preparation.

A three-week mini pre-season was always unlikely to be enough to physically bring the players back to where they were at the end of the actual pre-season.

Gains made during the pre-season were also lost during the break. The Saturday Telegraph investigation reveals major injuries in the game have jumped from 3.97 each week to 6.64 each round in the last two years.

This week, 86 stars are unavailable for selection in comparison to 63 players after round 13 in 2018.

Storm coach Craig Bellamy spoke out after Thursday night's win over the Roosters.

"I can't remember an injury toll like the game has got now," he said. "When people get fatigued they start putting their bodies in the wrong places. That's where you get injuries. It's something we need to look at. It was like a MASH unit out there tonight, blokes getting hurt, left right and centre." NRL physio Brian Seeney has been monitoring the statistics all year. He says it's a combination of reasons, not just the extra physical demands from rule changes.

"No question the injuries are more severe than in previous seasons," he said. "Too much fatigue can cause injuries. Muscles have a failure point. The most common time to do a hamstring or calf is late in the game. It's about finding that middle ground. When there's no fatigue and big forwards are bashing into each other at full power, that's also a big risk." There's also the important point that back-up players are coming into NRL starting teams under-prepared. They're not match -hardened -because there's no second-tier football.

The NRL is also monitoring the situation closely. Superstars of the competition have been missing for long periods. A mixture of older players and rookies - Cameron Smith, Cameron Munster, Josh Hodgson, Tom Trbojevic, Valentine Holmes and the game's most exciting youngsters, Bradman Best and Harry Grant.

This is a game that lost champions Greg Inglis and Sam Burgess last year because their bodies could no longer cope with the punishment.

The NRL's head of football -Graham Annesley said there would be a review at the end of the season.

"Player safety and welfare is our top priority," he said. "We do everything we can to minimise injuries and help keep them on the field.

"The commission will review all data available and formulate policy accordingly in the best interests of the game and the players. This season has been like no other in terms of the impact of COVID-19.

"As part of the injury reporting we will assess the impact of the -season suspension after round two and the lay-off until the resumption, the restrictions of the biosecurity bubbles and protocols, the lack of second-tier football for fringe players, and the speed and intensity of the game as it has evolved over the course of the season." Players' union boss Clint Newton is on an NRL workloads and balance committee with club CEOs and medical experts, who are examining the latest injury trends. It is a huge issue because the NRL wants to decrease roster numbers from 30 to 28 next year to reduce costs and the salary cap.

On Wednesday night, the injury situation was raised in a phone hook-up with leaders of the RLPA.

"We need to keep an eye on everything that relates to player -welfare and injuries and properly analyse the data," Newton said. "This year has presented so many variables. We've got to be on top of it.

"We've had extra travel players have had to endure. The fact they get home in the early hours of the morning and miss sleep. Sleep is a massive factor in recovery." The injury issue and questions about the brutality of the game have been regularly raised in recent years but not acted on. In every position on a football field, player weights have exploded in the modern era.

The great winger Ken Irvine was 77kg in his heyday. Parramatta's Blake Ferguson is 30kg heavier.

Knights halfback Mitchell Pearce is heavier than his father Wayne, who was one of the game's toughest forwards. Teams are 200kg heavier than back in the 1970s.

We've seen incidents all season.

The shocking collision when superstar James Tedesco tried to stop battering ram Maika Sivo to protect his try line, or the sickening sight of Wests Tigers utility Michael Chee Kam on the ground having a seizure.

We see injuries and frightening moments every season, but not as -regularly as in 2020.

NRL PLAYERS ON THE INJURY LIST AFTER RD 13: 2018.....................................63 2019.....................................78 2020-..................................94 Increase...........................49% INCREASE IN MAJOR INJURIES PER ROUND 5+ weeks recovery required 2018................3.97 per round 2020..............6.64 per round increase...........................67%

REALITY BEHIND RUGBY LEAGUE'S BRUTAL INJURY CRISIS HEAVY TOLL: Every NRL player ruled out for five weeks or more in the first 13 rounds of 2020 Jackson Ferris (MCL sprain), Andrew Fifita (finger), Cameron King (ACL rupture), Ronaldo Mulitalo (meniscus tear) Paul Momirovski (finger tendon), Tui Kamikamica (back), Suliasi Vunivalu (fractured jaw), John Bateman (distal clavicle), Emre Guler (ankle fracture), Josh Hodgson (ACL rupture), Corey Horsburgh (Lisfranc injury), Michael Oldfield (broken thumb), Bailey Simonsson (shoulder reco), Sia Soliola (facial fracture) Robert Jennings (hamstring strain), Zane Musgrove (Lisfranc injury), Alex Twal (MCL sprain), Billy Walters (ACL/MCL) Jesse Arthars (tibial plateau fracture), Jack Bird (ACL rupture), David Fifita (meniscus tear), Alex Glenn (MCL tear), vMatt Lodge (partial ACL tear and fractured leg), Anthony Milford (hamstring), Tesi Niu (wrist cartilage), Jake Turpin (tibial plateau Qfracture) Tom Trbojevic (hamstring strain), Dylan Walker (ankle and foot fracture) Adam Elliott (shoulder reco), Will Hopoate (syndesmosis repair), Chris Smith (partial ACL/MCL rupture), Joe Stimson (shoulder reco), Kane Evans (calf strain), Oregon Kaufusi (hand fracture), Reed Mahoney (Jones fracture), Ray Stone (hand fracture) Mitch Barnett (neck ACDF), Bradman Best (syndesmosis injury), Jayden Brailey (ACL rupture), Tim Glasby (concussion), Edrick Lee (broken arm), Sione Mata'utia (syndesmosis injury), Andrew McCullough (hamstring), Daniel Saifiti (PCL partial tear), Connor Watson (syndesmosis injury & achilles rupture) John Asiata (meniscus tear), Scott Drinkwater (MCL rupture), Peter Hola (wrist dislocation), Val Holmes (syndesmosis repair), Jordan McLean (calf strain), VMichael Morgan (shoulder surgery), Tom Opacic (knee) Tom Amone (ACL/ MCL rupture), Braidon Burns (patella rupture), Ethan Lowe (neck disc ACDF), Liam Knight (ankle sprain), Patrick Mago (pec rupture), James Roberts (pec rupture) Kurt Capewell (MCL rupture), Charlie Staines (hamstring), Zane Tetevano (back), Brian To'o (syndesmosis repair) Mitchell Aubusson (broken wrist), Lachlan Lam (syndesmosis repair), Billy Smith (ACL rupture), Daniel Tupou (syndesmosis repair), Victor Radley (ACL rupture), Sam Verrills (ACL rupture) Cameron McInnes (MCL sprain), Tariq Sims (AC joint), Brayden Wiliame (calf strain) Bunty Afoa (ACL rupture), Leeson Ah Mau (pec rupture), Jackson Frei (ACL rupture), Adam Keighran (tibial plateau fracture), Taane Milne (ACL rupture), Selestino Ravutau- mada (shoulder), Jazz Tevaga (LCL rupture) AJ Brimson (back fracture), Ryan James (ACL rupture), Jonus Pearson (pec rupture), Mitch Rein (PCL partial tear), Young Tonumaipea (MCL sprain)
---
Stumpy was a giant of our game Vale Arthur Summons (Gladiator to the end, 18/5).

Arthur Summons, nicknamed Stumpy, who died in Wagga Wagga aged 84 has left an everlasting impact on the game of rugby league.

Even though the half back was short in stature he was a giant in the game. What a fitting tribute to him and Norm Provan to be immortalised in that iconic NRL premiership trophy, too.

Gone but not forgotten, RIP Arthur Summons.

Joy Cameron, Young

Sad Greens reduced to playing comic relief card It's amazing what the Greens' Adam Bandt, Sarah Hanson-Young and the rest of their loony ilk can come up with (Greens' dream dead on arrival, 18/5).

If we were to adopt their policies or even just a few of them, Australia would be "up the creek without a paddle".

It will be hard enough to come back to economic prosperity from the Wuhan virus pandemic, without a bunch of fanatics trying to hijack our recovery.

It's so ludicrous in fact, I'm sure the clowns of our parliament have dreamt up this "green deal" as a bit of comic relief, to put a smile on our faces in these tense pandemic and economic times.

Peter Cattlin, Freshwater

The sacrifices of science History writer Troy Lennon has captured the real essence of human courage challenging science, describing the work and untimely death of volcanologist David Johnston 40 years ago. (Scientist died as Mount St Helen blew its top, 18/5).

The same selfless bravery is evident as the world records more than 1000 deaths of health workers battling the murderous COVID-19 virus.

When science entices our curiosity like the sirens of Greek mythology, the dangers and benefits of exploring Pandora's box are unfairly shared.

A singular, academic focus in David Johnston's life might well have blinded his instinct for safety and survival.

As is true in the fight with COVID-19, much is unknown, including assessing risk.

No volcanic smoke can hide our great admiration of the risk takers, who ultimately make our lives safer.

Alan Sexton, North Parramatta

Give the bush a break Just a thought: If there was an infectious outbreak in my regional area, would Sydney be locked down?

Of course not. So why are rural areas with no cases of COVID-19 still having to follow the same rules as the city?

Don't forget many rural areas have already been drastically affected by drought and bushfires and are in a bad way.

Premier, please let us get back to (sort of) normal!

Claire, Coonabarabran

Future proofing for Oz Well done to Australia and other countries that have banded together to look into the origin of COVID- 19 (ScoMo's COVID coup, 18/5).

At this time, China's bullying tactics have come to the fore as they threaten to suspend imports or put tariffs on goods that come from Australia.

The latest dummy spit on their part was not to even answer calls to discuss things.

It is a wake-up call to Australia and the rest of the world about China and its true intentions.

It's time to stop putting all our eggs in one basket, think outside the square and look at other markets to sell our goods.

Also, restarting our manufacturing industries, particularly with vital supplies, such as medical ones, could be a good start. This could be seen as an insurance policy for the future.

Joe Kovac, Prestons

History will pass judgment When the history of the 2020 coronavirus pandemic is written up Australia and New Zealand will be treated with merit (ScoMo's COVID coup, 18/5).

One man, one woman; one conservative government; one left-leaning government; all united in one purpose.

But, the analysis of China will be scathing.

However, 2020 might just be the catalyst that awakens that nation's 1.4 billion people and sets in motion change. People have to eat and it is certain those 1.4 billion will not be invited to the same table as the Communist Party elite.

Add the disgraceful insult to humanity China has displayed through its arrogance and the wheels of change might have just started to turn.

You've got to stay strong here PM - we are all in your corner on this. Warwick Egan, Umina Beach

We're not out of this yet Our new infections are very small now but each day I look at the recovered numbers and they just don't seem to be going down so much.

The recovery period is, in my reading, clearly a lot longer than a couple of weeks. Is it three weeks, four weeks, more?

And, just look at the McDonald's situation in Victoria. One case can affect dozens of employees and all their contacts.

Stay vigilant everybody, it's not over yet.

Garry Robinson, Mannering Park

Time is the enemy of truth While it appears that the demands for an independent and thorough investigation into the origins of the COVID-19 pandemic has finally found support from many other nations, it needs to happen pretty damn quick in my opinion (ScoMo's gang of 62, 18/5).

If China eventually acquiesces, it has had plenty of time to manipulate the data, eliminate evidence and enable a massive cover-up of vital information.

What occurs to me too, is the serious question of the total lack of appropriate support or indeed action by the very body which is supposedly responsible for the health of the world - the World Health Organisation.

Carol Cosham, Gymea Bay

Figures of substance Lots of people are, quite rightly, being thanked for all their hard work during the COVID-19 crisis.

One group that has been ignored and has been absolutely essential in flattening the curve are the mathematicians.

Thanks so much to this often maligned group.

We wouldn't know where we are without you, thanks for taking the work on the curve to the limit.

Peter, Cessnock

Now bump the bunker We just need one referee - and no NRL bunker (Interchange to entertain, 18/5). The bunker slows the game down too much, so get rid of it. Have two linesmen each side of the field and one each at the goalpost ends and make sure they know that they are paid to watch the game.

When a decision is to be made re a forward pass, try or no try etc they can confer with the referee. A decision is quickly made. Straight back to play.

Captains etc should not be allowed to question the decision. If they do so, send them off. They are there to play not to make decisions.

At the end of the season you will have won some and lost some but in the end all will be equal and we the spectators will be coming in droves to see a great and fast game.

Carmel Kennif, Randwick

Briefly …

With or without any inquiries or trade sanctions, the Chinese government has done enormous damage to the "Made in China" label.

Gary, Engadine.

"" " Come on premier, think outside the bureaucratic box. You can open the regional areas quicker than the metro. This one size fits all approach is so detrimental to the economy and the ever-reducing time frame to save small business.

Scott, Manly "" " This virus has put our country into unknown debt and problems but that's not enough for the loony Greens (Greens' dream dead on arrival, 18/5). If Labor/Greens get into power in the next 10 or more years we will never get out of debt.

Liz, Gosford

HAVE YOUR SAYMAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
A TSUNAMI of red ink has engulfed the Australian stock exchange as panicked investors take flight, handing the market its worst single-day rout in more than a decade.

In the biggest sell-off for any session since the depths of the global financial crisis in 2008, the benchmark ASX 200 index plunged 7.3 per cent yesterday.

The slump has dramatically extended the sell-off triggered by the coronavirus outbreak and left the bourse within a whisker of a "bear market".

It comes as a succession of bleak developments buffet sentiment at home and abroad and heighten fears the global economy is sliding into recession as the virus marches rapidly around the world.

The selling spree yesterday wiped $137.1 billion off the value of Australia's biggest listed companies. It takes to $418"billion the amount ripped from the market since February 20, when the ASX 200 was at a record high.

The index has since tumbled 19.6 per cent - a fraction short of the 20 per cent sell-off broadly regarded as a bear market.

Rattling investors, Italian authorities moved overnight Sunday to put swathes of that nation's north under quarantine as they ratcheted up efforts to slow the spread of the COVID-19 virus. The lockdown affects 16"million people, or more than a quarter of the Italian population.

Separately, oil prices plunged at the weekend after talks among nations that are major producers - aimed at curtailing supply to prop up a market foundering amid global recession fears - broke down.

Heavyweight ratings agency Moody's Investors Service published a report yesterday saying global recession risks had increased as the spread of COVID-19 resulted in "simultaneous supply and demand shocks".

Also yesterday, Westpac chief economist Bill Evans said he believed Australia was sliding into recession. The economy, without stimulus from taxpayers, was likely to shrink 0.3 per cent both this quarter and next, he said.

Mr Evans noted the federal government was due in coming days to announce a "policy response" as it moved to stimulate the economy, and said Westpac would then revise its forecast. He cautioned there was significant "uncertainty around these forecasts due to the unpredictable course of the outbreak".

In a research report, a team of Moody's analysts said the virus would "hurt economic growth in many countries" in the first half this year.

"Global recession risks have risen. The longer the outbreak affects economic activity, the demand shock will dominate and lead to recessionary -dynamics," they said.

"In particular, a sustained pullback in consumption, coupled with extended closures of businesses, would hurt earnings, drive layoffs and weigh on sentiment." In such a climate, the recessionary dynamics could become "self sustaining", Moody's said.

The ASX 200 has lost ground in 10 of the past 12 trading sessions, surrendering about 1400 points.

Over that period, it has shed all the gains it made in the previous 13 months: at 5760.6 points, it is back where it last sat in early January last year.

The major banks, which have been punished in the sell-off, were again in the crosshairs yesterday.

Shares in the big four fell more than 6"per cent, dragging them all deep into bear-market territory.

Mining titan BHP was also among those hit particularly hard as investors turned on resources companies following the breakdown of talks among oil-producing nations.

BHP shares tumbled 14.4"per cent.

Australia's biggest pureplay oil and gas producer, Woodside Petroleum, cratered 18.4"per cent, while Origin Energy plunged 15.8 per cent.

Fund management heavyweight Fidelity International yesterday said a "worse-case scenario appears to be unfolding for oil markets".

"Expectations of a demand shock due to the global outbreak of the COVID-19 coronavirus collided over the weekend with an anticipated supply surge," the said.peter.taylor@news.com.au
---
PM: Sovereignty not for sale AUSTRALIA is open to meeting with Beijing officials to repair the relationship with China, but will not make "pre-emptive concessions," Prime Minister Scott Morrison says.

Mr Morrison said Australia valued its partnership with China, but would not be "conceding the points" it had "set out" on issues including foreign investment and human rights.

"We will of course remain absolutely open and available to meet, to discuss any of the issues that have been identified," he said.

"But those discussions, as I've made clear, won't take place on the base of any sort of pre-emptive concessions on Australia's part on those matters." Beijing officials have previously published a list of 14 grievances with Australia, insisting they be addressed in order for the damaged relationship to be repaired.

Australia's decision to block Huawei from its 5G contract, its calls for an investigation into the origins of COVID-19, the cancellation of some academic visas and criticism of tough new security laws in Hong Kong are among the Chinese Government's concerns.

Mr Morrison said Australia's position on those issues was "honest" and "transparent".

"But, of course, we value the trading and more broader comprehensive relationship, and we will be taking up whatever opportunities we believe is going to best position Australia to be in a position to advance that relationship," he said.

"It's an important relationship, but it is a relationship that will be pursued on the basis of Australia's national interests, and without, in any way, compromising Australia's sovereignty," he said.

Labor leader Anthony Albanese said on Monday he had written to Mr Morrison to suggest he engage with the expertise of former prime ministers amid increasing concern about jobs among the business community and union movement.

"It is China that is to blame for breaking down that relationship," he said. "But you need to find a way through, and I think that it is very sensible to engage former prime ministers Kevin Rudd and John Howard."
---
Ships rescue mission the right move I expect that many Sydney-siders share my discomfort with the state's management of six passenger liners in our coastal waters (Plea to save our souls, 1/4).

Treated as lepers, they are being refused port access or passenger disembarkation.

Their captains don't wish to sail away from access to ICUs with multiple sick passengers.

A plan for their urgent repatriation with currently idle Qantas aircraft might be costly, but the prestige from international publicity would prove an excellent campaign for advertising Australian tourism in the future.

The goodwill generated with the world's cruise liners is an opportunity not to be missed.

We cannot turn our backs on so many helpless people.

Alan Sexton, North Parramatta

Post-COVID revival needs to be made in Australia Business columnist Terry McCrann rightly calls for a post COVID-19 exit strategy - a plan for the government and the RBA to "unwind all their stimulus" (Enough stimulus, now for exit strategy, 1/4).

But an exit strategy must go further. We need to pay down the resulting crippling debt and eliminate our reliance on China which has been exposed as high-risk and a folly that will saddle Australia with a generation of debilitating debt to repay.

The time is right for PM Scott Morrison to resurrect Australia's manufacturing capability and re-establish its self-reliance.

Cheap energy enabled China to be a global manufacturing powerhouse. Now, Australia must embrace its abundance of low cost/high quality energy - coal and uranium - and, for the foreseeable future, abandon the ideological absurdity of high-cost, unreliable renewable energy that has progressively driven up energy costs and forced manufacturing offshore.

Bob Partington, Wahroonga

Life's little pleasures When this contagion passes it might hopefully usher in a new era of appreciation of what we all took for granted - visits to and from family and friends, the value of extended reading, the pleasures of the garden and its wildlife, and so much more.

We might also look forward to governments not being able to win votes so easily by propping up the rich at the expense of the poor, denigrating minorities and belittling the indigent.

Ron Sinclair, Bathurst

Qantas is Virgin on selfish In opposing the federal bailout of Virgin Australia, Qantas is hardly acting like the "spirit of Australia" (Help one, help all: Qantas, 1/4).

Virgin Australia has said that it requires an emergency bailout for its survival. Qantas has it all wrong when it argues that Virgin should not receive extra help.

Right now, the issue is not which companies are better managed. The critical issue is sustaining the economy This is not a matter of Qantas vs Virgin - this is a matter of avoiding severe recession or depression.

Once large companies begin to fail, the failures spiral so that even more companies fail and more people become unemployed.

Right now, through massive infusions of cash to stabilise employment until the crisis is over, the federal government is doing what's right for the country.

As a future traveller, I won't quickly forget the selfish behaviour exhibited by Qantas.

Harry Melkonian, Vaucluse

Back words with action Our government is certainly making brave statements like "those found buying and shipping PPE and other essential equipment used to fight COVID-19 to other countries" face a five-year jail sentence (The mask avengers, 1/4).

Wow, what brave words to use considering a five-year sentence will likely never be used.

Maybe if it was made mandatory and if used for the first offender it may deter the second offender.

Until it is used, it is a meaningless statement.

Jim, Wollongong

Bitter truth unmasked Tons of medical equipment vital to Australia's battle during the global pandemic spirited back to China by companies associated with its government (The mask avengers, 1/4).

This should be a massive wake-up call to not only our government but all Australians as to our place in the Chinese government's pecking order.

The message is, the Chinese government will plunder our resources as their need arises - regardless of our needs.

However, any criticism of the Chinese superpower will be met by the usual suspects trying to stifle legitimate debate by using the tiresome one-word fallback for those without an original opinion - xenophobia.

I have great faith the Morrison government will take the necessary steps to protect Australia's national strategic resources and guarantee a strong and independent future for coming generations.

There is no need for "xenophobia" to enter this discussion as it's not the Chinese people that's the problem, it's their ruthless government.

Bruce Collison, Banks, ACT

Protect our property I was concerned to read that on the one hand you have the federal government putting limits on foreign investment during the current health crisis (Safeguard for Aussie assets at crisis time, 30/4), yet an article on real estate agents highlighted their keenness to market our homes overseas to compensate for a slowing of domestic sales and thus agents' sales commissions (China eyes our assets, 1/4).

I worry that some struggling Australians could be convinced to sell at any price and then live to regret such a decision?

I'm not allowed to own property in China for example. Why can they buy property here?

Dave Buckeridge, Dudley

Saving the Origin Here's my solution to save State of Origin - and our sanity. A team of 25 players are chosen for each state and these players and any staff, referees etc are tested before entering 14 days quarantine in Brisbane. Another test is conducted on the day of the game.

Game 1 is played on a Friday night in Brisbane. After the game they are flown on a charter plane to a quarantine centre where they are again tested for COVID-19.

Game 2 is played on the Wednesday night in Sydney with players and staff returning to quarantine where they continue training for Game 3 on Sunday.

While there would be no crowds at the games it would get huge TV ratings and keep the footy-loving public half sane.

Col, Blacksmiths

Briefly … With taxpayers struggling financially, where are the pollies and bureaucrats with their current untouchable wages? Surely a 50 per cent cut would be the first step.

Nev, Menai "" " As there are no new sporting clashes to show on TV is there any chance the free-to-air stations could play some classic games from the past?

Alan Wright, Grafton "" " Where have the climate change protesters gone? Also it's worth noting … no riots in Hong Kong, no protests in Paris, no terrorism anywhere. Just proves what a bunch of scaredy cats they all are.

Paul Blakeney, Glebe "" " I wonder if those whingeing returning travellers who have been "incarcerated" in five-star hotels would like some cheese and biscuits with their whine?

Allan Brooker, Belfield "" " Please stop these real estate agents from selling us out (China eyes our assets, 1/4).

Ron, Erina "" " Thanks to all the staff maintaining production and distribution of The Daily Telegraph. It is great to have my favourite newspaper still available every day and the Hibernation section has been a lovely bonus.

Jennifer, Westleigh

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily TelegraphGPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
CHINESE threats to boycott Australian exports if the Morrison government continues to pursue an inquiry into the origins of the coronavirus pandemic have been dismissed as support for an -investigation remains strong.

China's ambassador to Australia Cheng Jingye said the Chinese public was dismayed at Australia's push for an independent inquiry into the COVID-19 outbreak and might consider boycotting major exports including beef and wine. He also said Chinese students may no longer travel to study in Australia.

"The parents of the students would also think whether this place which they found is not so friendly, even hostile, whether this is the best place to send their kids (to Australia)," he told the Australian Financial Review. "It is up to the people to decide. Maybe the ordinary people will say 'Why should we drink Australian wine? Eat Australian beef?'" But Labor's Foreign Affairs spokeswoman Penny Wong backed the government's call for an independent inquiry.

"The Chinese ambassador spoke about not wanting to resort to recrimination, division, and suspicion," she said.

"That is precisely the reason why we want to make sure the international community can be assured that we get to the bottom of the origin of the virus."Australian Health Minister Greg Hunt said an independent inquiry was in the interests of Australia and the world. "We've seen … over 200,000 lives lost so of course there has to be an independent review," Mr Hunt told the ABC.
---
Saving one iconic ferry not enough Wow, what a waste.

Only one of the Freshwater-class Manly ferries is to retained - for weekends and public holidays (Safe harbour for old dame, 28/11).

So, in the so-called wisdom of the NSW Coalition government, they are wasting million of dollars for new faster boats - a saving of a mere eight minutes in travel time.

Why would you want to save eight minutes on one of the most beautiful harbours in the world?

And on a beautiful ferry that is part of Australian history. If it was an old fibro house it would likely be heritage listed. Glenn O'Sullivan, Kanwal

There's another side to this cut-price debate It's a funny thing when you compare consumer goods from other countries on sale in Australia - the Chinese product is nearly always cheaper (hundreds of dollars on some products) than other brands from other countries (China's whines hurting our wines, 28/11)?

Excuse my doubts, but are Chinese state-owned companies dumping product into our market? Heaven forbid that the Chinese Communist Party might even be thinking of that?

It's about time we placed our own tariffs on Chinese-made products at the same rate as inflicted on our wine industry and others.

Let's see how their quality stands up on a level playing field? I bet sales would decline dramatically.

Brad Probert, Woodlands

Big stick of cruel regime It is just pure vindictiveness that sees the Chinese government wanting to dictate a list of terms for Australia to comply with after our government wanted an inquiry into the origins of COVID -19, which started in China (China's whines hurting our wines, 28/11).

Now they are out to punish Australia with a big financial hit to our economy with bans and duties on our products.

There's a ridiculous 212 per cent tariff on our wine and 50 ships with Australian coal kept at sea and not allowed in ports to unload under the lie that our coal quality is not good.

But of course it's all about Australia calling out China's total disregard for human rights, as have many countries, but it seems we have come in for special treatment.

Now we are seeing the true face of communism in a country run by brutal despots who had no qualms about killing thousands of young students in Tiananmen Square and are now using the big stick on Australia.

Robert Livingstone, Alexandria

Licence rules' grey area The husband of a young mother who was killed after a 90-year-old drove into her has said there need to be tougher laws for elderly drivers (Get killer elderly drivers off the road, 27/11).

The young mother had been sitting with friends outside a North Epping cafe when she was struck.

There have been recent campaigns for a crackdown on the assessment of older drivers.

A major problem exists as there is no national standard when it comes to assessing the competency of aged drivers.

Victoria doesn't require drivers to pass a license test when they reach a certain age, instead the onus is on drivers to decide when they need to reduce or stop driving.

The elderly value the freedom of having a driver's licence and are very often loath to stop driving.

The need for a national standard for assessing drivers over 65 has been in the too-hard basket long enough.

Peter Penglis, Kambah, ACT

Beware more car horrors Yet another report of the death of a toddler left in a hot car (Girl dies after being left in hot car, 28/11).

I can't imagine the suffering this little one endured.

It is a timely warning to all - don't leave kids in cars. It's an Australian summer, let's not lose another precious little life.

Marg Swindells, Castle Hill

Justice suspended The Victorian County Court is sending the wrong message (Thieving union boss spared prison, 27/11).

For someone who has stolen more than $100,000 from hardworking health workers/union members not to be given a custodial sentence is just wrong.

This person has stolen money from union members and used it on trips overseas to London, Paris and the US, and paid off debts for family members while the union members performed their difficult and often unpleasant tasks. Go figure.

I wonder if I stole $100,000 from my employer, would I get a suspended sentence? Ian Field, Wagga Wagga

COVID rules roasted I attended a local club last Thursday evening for my regular "roast of the day" dinner.

I couldn't get in the door because the club had reached its one person per four square metres capacity (Cabinet's space split, 27/11).

And it will be a lot worse in the summer holidays.

The COVID police may need to attend to break up fights with frustrated holiday makers looking to spend money, but not being able to find somewhere to do so.

Jim Andrews, Ballina

Agony of the army parent I have to thank Joel Fitzgibbon for his very enlightening opinion piece about our troops (Where did it go wrong - Opinion, 27/11).

Although not in the SAS, our son served in Afghanistan and I have to say it was the longest 10 months in our lives.

Some short phone calls from him in the middle of the night were the only contact we had.

Whenever there was a press release that one of our troops had been killed our immediate thoughts and prayers were for the family of the lost soldier as we knew they had already received that "knock on the door" that no parent wants.

John Stuart, St Fillans

When the halo slips While Gladys Berejiklian has proven to be the best premier during the pandemic, her "halo" has slipped a bit in recent times.

I don't hold her dalliance with "dodgy Daryl" against her, in fact it humanises her a bit, but her recent slip-up on not quarantining following a coronavirus test, her "pork barrelling" comments and her war of words with a fellow premier show lack of judgment.

But worst of all, her government has turned "green", which was not on the voters' radar prior to last year's election.

Janice Russell, Malua Bay

Thunder enlightening Yes the Sydney Thunder vs Melbourne Stars 2020 WBBL final was anti-climatic in a way, but this should not divert attention away from what has been a riveting tournament played out by some of the most accomplished female cricketers in the world, the majority of them homegrown Australia talent.

Congratulations to the winning Sydney Thunder team and commiserations to the Melbourne Stars, who lost the final but were the best team for most of the tournament.

Eric Palm, Gympie, Queensland

Briefly … So sick of this Chinese communist dictatorship trying to make Australia another Hong Kong (China's whines hurting our wines, 28/11). Tear up the trade deal, stop all iron ore exports and let China shop elsewhere.

Dazza, Singleton "" " Good on you, James Graham. A fitting way to end a great career (Graham goes out a winner after last-gasp final drama, 29/11).

Peter Wilcox, Blayney "" " Why is it we are told to cough into our elbows, then to greet folk with an elbow tap?

Troy Henry, Long Flat "" " It fails the pub test when a small, stubborn minority of anti-vaxxers may keep the virus alive when the COVID vaccine is available (Need to deny anti-vax push - editorial, 28/11). It is a commonsense case of no one is safe until everyone is safe.

Steve Ngeow, Chatswood "" " So Joe Hildebrand reckons Albo's on the right track (Opinion, 28/11). Yeah, a dead end.

George Day, Old Bar

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
ABOUT 90 per cent of Victoria's COVID-19 cases are likely traceable back to one family who quarantined at Melbourne's Rydges Hotel, an inquiry has heard.

But precisely how the virus -escaped from hotel quarantine -remains a mystery, with investigators unable to pinpoint the -moment of transmission.

The remaining cases in the state are likely connected to -another quarantine hotel, the Stamford Plaza, an expert says, with 99 per cent of all current cases linked to the bungled hotel quarantine program.

The family of four returned to Australia on May 9 and entered quarantine. After they all developed symptoms they were moved to the Rydges Hotel on Swanston St on May 15.

Giving evidence to the Melbourne hotel quarantine inquiry on Tuesday, epidemiologist Dr Charles Alpren said that on May 25 three staff members developed symptoms and were diagnosed with COVID-19.

He believes the three people -included both staff at Rydges and external contractors.

The family did not leave the hotel during their stay and were supervised when outside their room. The Stamford Plaza outbreak has two origins, one man and a couple who quarantined there.
---
EXCLUSIVE Intel agencies uneasy about US virus claim

THE Australian government and its intelligence agencies are understood to be growing increasingly uneasy with the US President's bold claims COVID-19 probably leaked from a Wuhan laboratory.

The origins of coronavirus, and whether it inadvertently leaked from the Wuhan Institute of Virology, is the subject of an investigation by the Five Eyes Intelligence agencies of Australia, New Zealand, Canada, US and UK.

The Daily Telegraph understands the central concern emerging from the Australian government and its security- agencies is that the US may be putting undue emphasis on the theory the virus originated in a Wuhan laboratory.

In an extraordinary comparison, one senior federal source said there were emerging fears in the intelligence community that the US administration could be repeating mistakes made by George Bush and Tony Blair when they pressured the UN weapons inspector to declare Saddam- Hussein possessed weapons of mass destruction.

In recent days the lab-leak line of inquiry has been promoted as the most likely cause of the outbreak by US President Donald Trump and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, who said there was "a significant amount of evidence" to support it.

The Daily Telegraph understands Australia has seen all of the evidence the US possesses under the intelligence sharing arrangement and there is nothing yet to strongly suggest the naturally-occurring virus came out of the laboratory rather than the wet market. This has led to unrest within Australian intelligence agencies.

The ultimate goal of both the Australian and US governments is the same; seeing China held accountable for its negligence and cover-up of the outbreak which has cost tens of thousands of lives around the world.

On Saturday, The Daily Telegraph published a dossier compiled by concerned Western governments that lays out the case against China over its "suppression and destruction of evidence", its "deadly denial of human-to-human transmission" and its "assault on international transparency" as it sought to cover-up the coronavirus contagion.

While the end-goal of holding China accountable is consistent, the schism between the US executives' position on China's culpability for the outbreak and the Australian intelligence agencies has put Scott Morrison in an awkward position.

The Australian government's official- position is that COVID-19 most likely originated in a wet market and there is a 5 per cent chance it was born as a result of an accident in the Wuhan Institute of Virology.

Mr Morrison is taking a more nuanced- approach than the US that avoids direct accusations against China as he seeks to build consensus for an inquiry at the World Health Assembly in Geneva next month.

The Prime Minister wrote to the G20 nations on Monday, pitching a review into the pandemic response.

"What's really important is that we have a proper review, an independent review, which looks into the sources of these things in a transparent way so we can learn," he said.It is understood Mr Morrison does not want to publicly undermine comments- made by either Mr Trump or Mr Pompeo, with whom the Prime Minister has a particularly good rapport-. In recent days Mr Trump said he has seen evidence that he was not allowed to share which supported the theory the coronavirus was an accidental- leak from a facility in Wuhan, where there have been concerns about safety practices.
---
ELECTRICITY grids, dams and telecommunications networks were all targets of the foreign hackers behind weeks of online attacks, experts say.

Industrial secrets which could give other countries an unfair advantage in trade talks were also the target of the major cyberattack that spanned all levels of government, businesses and political organisations.

Security sources believe China was to blame although the Morrison government has refrained from publicly naming the culprit, instead describing it as a "sophisticated state-based cyber actor".

Alastair MacGibbon, the federal Government's former cyber security tsar, described the attack as "aggressive" and said the hackers were potentially hunting for information which could help them commit "destructive acts" in the future.

"It strikes me as a strategic intelligence exercise on their part; find out as much as you can about Australia, steal trade secrets to help our country versus theirs," he said.

"Cyber is going to play very heavily in war, and it's obviously going to play very heavily in the lead-up to war.

"You need access in order to carry out destructive activities, and we need to get much smarter and better at -protecting our critical infrastructure.  "Cyber security is the greatest existential threat we're going to face." Mr MacGibbon said he was unsure which nation was behind the massive cyber-hit on Australia which also targeted essential services, critical infrastructure and the education sector, as well as government systems.

Yesterday China denied responsibility. "The attacks and the blame coming from this institute against China is totally baseless and nonsense," China Ministry of Foreign -Affairs spokesman Zhao Lijian said.

He said China was the "biggest victim of cyber attacks" and was committed to cyber security.

Australian security agencies have spent weeks using -offensive tactics to keep hackers out of companies and government computers.

The wave of cyber attacks comes one month after Australia won unanimous support for its bid to set up an independent probe into the origins of the COVID-19 pandemic. Australia's relationship with China was further strained by a recent trade dispute, travel bans and a warning from Beijing that tourists and students should reconsider coming to Australia. Canberra has also condemned the death sentence handed to Australian alleged drug smuggler Karm Gilespie as well as China's plan to impose a strict national security law on Hong Kong.
---
EXCLUSIVE LOST MASTERPIECE 'FOUND' UNDER LEGENDARY ART A HIDDEN masterpiece, lost more for more than 100 years, has been found under one of Australia's most famous paintings.

In one of the biggest discoveries in Australian art history, the Frederick McCubbin classic painting The Pioneer has for 115 years hidden another masterpiece - a long lost painting called, ironically, Found.

The National Gallery of Victoria uncovered the secret in mid October when the gallery's head of conservation shone a torch on The Pioneer and noticed a shadow on the central panel of painting.

X-rays confirmed the lost masterpiece has been hidden in plain sight for 115 years.

Millions have "viewed" it. They just didn't know it was there, hidden under the Australian classic, valued at tens of millions of dollars.

McCubbin's decision to paint over Found may have gone unnoticed except for the detective work of the NGV's head of conservation, Michael Varcoe-Cocks.

Varcoe-Cocks was checking artworks in the deserted galleries as part of his COVID-19 duties on a Friday afternoon in mid- October. "It was spooky work," he said, and a "tragic privilege" to admire paintings deprived all other patrons in the silent blackness of lockdown.

He paused at The Pioneer, one of his favourite paintings.

"I was looking at it, taking a little moment for myself, and then I saw this bit of texture, this shadow of a form," he said.

He only noticed a curved line through the lower half of The Pioneer's middle panel because he was working with a torch in darkness.

Under lights, the line is barely discernible.

It served no obvious purpose in the finished Pioneer work of 1904. The observation, like a scene from The Da Vinci Code, was a first clue in a tangled puzzle.

Varcoe-Cocks wondered if McCubbin, as many artists do, had painted over an earlier work. Then he remembered.

He had X-rayed The Pioneer in 2013. And he'd seen something in the X-ray at the time.

He rushed back to his research area and found the digital images. They clearly showed McCubbin's unusual application with the edge of a card or a palette knife.

Yet X-rayed art, a common practice in art restoration, is difficult to interpret, given layers upon layers of paint.

This X-ray had revealed shapes not visible in the final work. But it had not resolved clear images.

Varcoe-Cocks went home for the weekend and pondered the clues. "I thought I'd seen this form somewhere before," Varcoe-Cocks said. He just didn't know where.

He had studied McCubbin's scrapbook in 2019 for an upcoming exhibition. His lightning bolt realisation hit on the following Tuesday.

Armed with an unusually astute visual memory, he had seen the form, he sensed, in McCubbin's scrapbook.

Within its yellowed pages, among family photos and copies of other artists' works, McCubbin had pinned a black-and-white photo of Found to a right-hand page.

This small and faded image was the critical clue. There is no other photo of Found thought to exist.

The sapling on that painting's left side matched the sapling in The Pioneer's middle panel.

The vegetation at the panel's bottom appeared to match in both paintings. Most importantly, perhaps, was the long curved line, which traced the back of the life-size bushman in Found as he leant over a limp child. The ghostly outline depicted in The Pioneer X-ray vaguely resembled a worker in full Personal Protective Equipment. Varcoe-Cocks compared it with images of Found and The Pioneer.

Outlines of the bushie's hat, and his arm, in Found could be identified in the X-ray. The PPE effect of the X-ray was conjured by the bushie's beard.

"I digitally overlaid this to that," he said. "It was a perfect match." It was his Eureka moment. He had found Found. It had been lost to The Pioneer. "It's always a remarkable and wonderful thing to solve an otherwise unsolved mystery," he said.

"There's a great sense of relief, that you can put the file aside of a missing artwork.

"Then I started to realise the implications of what Found actually was. It was the origin of The Pioneer." Found was critically acclaimed when it was exhibited in the 1893 Victorian Artists' Society exhibition.

But no one paid the asking price of 250 guineas - more than the average annual wage and about $100,000 in today's money - in economically depressed times.

It was believed the painting may have been later sold privately, then somehow lost over the following century.

It was odd that such a major statement artwork simply disappeared. "If it had survived, it would have been an incredibly imposing work to have stood in front of," Varcoe-Cocks said. "It would have been one of McCubbin's major masterpieces, for sure." The discovery of McCubbin's submerging of the painting for another suggests The Pioneer was painted in a process of evolution and experimentation.

Five generations of schoolchildren have viewed The Pioneer, a time-lapsed series of a changing landscape.

The paintings are embedded in Australian heritage.

Varcoe-Cocks' grandmother boasted the images on table place mats. McCubbin, along with his friend Tom Roberts, led an impressionist movement which depicted the Australian bush during the Federation era, when nation building was a preoccupation.

McCubbin was born in Melbourne in 1855. Unlike most successful artists of the era, he never left to paint elsewhere. Known to his art students as "Prof", he told friends of the great burden of The Pioneer in the months he painted it.

"McCubbin was fascinated with the Australian bush and returned to this theme repeatedly throughout his career," said NGV director Tony Ellwood. "Not only does this discovery solve a great mystery in Australian art history, but it also provides insight into the mind of one of our greatest artists, who, perhaps in a moment of inspiration, has chosen to explore a new idea by reworking an existing canvas." Dr Angela Hesson, the NGV's Curator of Australian Art (to 1980) said finding a lost work was always rare and exciting.

"But this painting by one of Australia's most celebrated artists is a particularly important find," she said.

"That the appropriately-titled Found should have been hanging on our walls undiscovered for so long, just beneath the surface of one of the NGV's most beloved paintings, is truly remarkable".

Varcoe-Cocks agreed that his discovery was most unlikely.

"If I wasn't walking through in the dark, with a torch, on my own, I probably wouldn't have had time to focus on it, make the connection and revisit the X-ray and to rediscover this little photo in a scrap book we had in storage," he said. "It was a true COVID moment." THE NATIONAL GALLERY OF VICTORIA, INCLUDING THE PIONEER, REOPENS ON MONDAY. FOR NSW ART FANS, THE PIONEER WILL BE CENTREPIECE OF AN EXHIBITION OF AUSTRALIAN IMPRESSIONISTS TO OPEN IN APRIL 2021.
---
THE fines just keep on coming for troubled Melbourne Storm winger Josh Addo-Carr.

On Tuesday, while he was driving home to Sydney from his Taree camping trip, Addo-Carr got pinched by the highway patrol for speeding on the Pacific Hwy near Nabiac.

We're told he was between 10 and 20km/h over the limit. Hard to believe, but true.

This follows the $1000 fine on Monday for failing to comply with social distancing laws; a $50,000 fine from the NRL on Tuesday for the breach ($30,000 suspended); as well as being charged with a firearms offence on Tuesday afternoon.

It was a shocking few days for the representative winger, who is now struggling to keep his place in both the NSW State of Origin team and the Kangaroos after losing the confidence and respect of Blues coach Brad Fittler and Australian coach Mal Meninga.

Still, Melbourne Storm are standing by him.

Your columnist spoke to Craig Bellamy on Thursday, who vowed to support the winger.

"What I can't work out is that if you knew you were doing the wrong thing, there's no way you'd put a photo out on social media," Bellamy said.

"The rules have been pushed hard but it's like he didn't understand the importance."

Rapana rejoins Green Machine NEW Zealand Test winger Jordan Rapana is back at the Canberra Raiders for the remainder of the NRL season.

He will resume tomorrow when the Raiders gather in the national capital for an education day on COVID-19 protocols.

Rapana cut short his Japanese rugby union stint with Panasonic Wild Knights when coronavirus forced a comp shutdown.

The 30-year-old winger returned to Canberra at the start of last month and spoke to coach Ricky Stuart about the possibility of a comeback. He was forced out after last year's grand final because of salary-cap pressure.Rapana had scored 61 tries in four seasons for the "Green Machine" and was regarded as one of the best finishers in the competition.
---
IT'S TIME TO CLOSE THE BORDER If the Melbourne hotspot suburbs are supposed to be in lockdown, then how on Earth did people get out of their suburb and into Sydney ("Bordering on madness", 3/7)?

If they flew then is no one checking IDs at Melbourne airport? They must have security at the entrance and anyone from the suburbs in question must be refused entry to the airport and the police called.

Not only are they risking infecting innocent bystanders at the airport, but a plane full of passengers and staff who could then do another flight compromising hundreds more.  What part of this do Victorians not understand?

Alison Campbell, Ballina

Victorian Premier Daniel Andrews really needs to close the border to NSW. By not doing so he is endangering the lives of the NSW people when the Victorians come over here by either plane or train.

All travel should now be forbidden between these two states and lockdown to occur throughout Victoria.

NSW Premier Gladys Ms Berejiklian needs to close our borders, too, in order to keep the virus out of here and to protect us from what's happening in Victoria.

Please Premiers, see common sense and close the border until the seriousness of this virus calms down. If other states can close borders, so can you.

Diana McCarty, Emus Plains

Advice from China not really needed First it was China attempting to punish Australia with economic sanctions and increasing propaganda persuading students and tourists not to come here, and now Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian has told Australia we should refrain from purchasing unnecessary military equipment and upgrading our missile range ("Beijing orders Australia not to stockpile weapons", 3/7).

Of course Australia has to adjust its military capabilities and strategy in response to China's military build-up under Xi Jinping's rule.

China has increased the size of the navy and air force and established a strategic support force that focuses on space, cyber and electronics warfare.

China has primarily relied on its economic power to cultivate its neighbours, including Australia. However, these countries remain wary of China's authoritarian system, which is becoming aggressive and assertive.

After China slammed Foreign Minister Marise Payne for meddling in Hong Kong's internal affairs, Australia's response to China over the government's announcement of modernising our military capability is for China to "butt out".

Warren Cato, Manyana

Sovereign rights The arrogance of China's Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian to order Australia not to stockpile weapons and all countries should avoid an arms race ("Beijing orders Australia not to stockpile weapons", 3/7). Australia has every right to protect its sovereignty from hostile and aggressive nations threatening our security.

The wolf in sheep's clothing is lurking on borders across the Indo-Pacific, and perhaps they should practise what they preach.

Graeme Hodder, Callala Bay

Gender mender If the belief that chromosomes determine biological gender, as distinct from psychological gender, is "biological determinism" then I must be a biological determinist ("Kevin Donnelly - Reason lost in transition", 3/7).

This does not mean I am transphobic. I am just stating a fact. The transgender community makes up less than 1 per cent of society and yet we are all supposed to change everything for the sake of such a small minority.

Children are to be brainwashedin schools about gender fluidity before they have a chance to know what gender is.

Transgender women have the right to compete in women's sports with the advantage of a male physique and testosterone. If a biological sportswoman takes testosterone, she is a cheat.

I think it is about time that the 99 per cent stopped worrying about being labelled a transphobic, heteronormative, capitalist society and started worrying about the lunacy that is currently prevailing.

Being labelled transphobic if one dares to utter a different viewpoint from theirs is the same as being labelled racist if one comments on the troubles within other communities. Speaking sense doesn't a transphobe or racist make.

Jeanette Dixon, Casula

Taking a toll The NSW government certainly has toll mania ("Glad's slip takes a toll", 2/7). It is giving away $540 in rego tax for spending over $1300 a year in tolls, which might all be paid to a private company.

For an increasing number of people, tolls are by far their biggest transport expense. Worse, you can really only travel east-west on a train in Western Sydney without a gigantic detour.

Worse again, we are really only building motorways this century when most developed countries built them toll-free in the last century.

Government finances would be better off if the tolls were halved but never privatised.

Peter Egan, Artarmon

Tracking system Corona-tracking Woolworths send staff home and warn customers who have had contact there to be checked ("Balmain bug bungles", 3/7). Why wouldn't all shops utilise their loyalty cards for identifying those at risk?

It could also be used to make sure that the product limits are adhered to. Patrick, Pennant Hills

Plant a seed and ...

The new Australian Made logo, which looks less wattle and more dandelion, is insipid in appearance and symbolism.

Blowing on a dried dandelion flower will disperse its seeds. Never mind that they'll land somewhere and very likely sprout new plants; more important is the fact that the flower can disintegrate with one small puff.

Is that the image we want to present to the world?

Paula Houseman, Kensington

Briefly ...

The Chinese CCP need not worry about our new missiles carrying nuclear warheads because they will have something much worse - COVID-19 ("Meanwhile, in China", 3/7).

David Penn, Online

* * * I see China is telling our Foreign Minister to butt out of their affairs regarding Hong Kong and in the same breath telling us not to improve our defence. How about they butt out of our affairs? I'm glad we have a strong Prime Minister.

Judith Morton, Kariong

* * * Knowing the origin of the new ridiculous supposedly Aussie logo, I feel it would really only require the approval of the Chinese ("Our new logo just plain loco", 2/7). I just hope good money wasn't used to produce something that is not as good as what my four-year-old grandson brings home from kindy.

Barry Laurie, Tweed Heads

* * * An excellent article by Kevin Donnelly re transgenderism ("Reason lost in transition", 3/7). I was shocked to learn that the Safe Schools program is still being taught in schools, and even more so that the Coalition federal government is funding it. Abolish it now.

Paul Sobb, Cammeray

* * * Dairy farms in Australia are closing down at an alarming rate and unless we want to drink imported milk the government should intervene in this failed market and compel much higher farm-gate prices.

Rod Matthews, Fairfield, Vic

HAVE YOUR SAYMAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
ELECTRICITY COVID-19 adds to energy giant woes AUSTRALIA'S two biggest electricity operators have taken a hit from weaker power prices, with Origin Energy slashing annual profit guidance and rival AGL Energy taking a surprise $2.69bn writedown.

Origin downgraded its full-year guidance for the 2021 financial year, citing subdued energy demand due to the impacts of COVID-19 and a mild summer season and higher gas costs amid a jump in Asian LNG prices.

The energy company now expects its energy market full-year earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation to be in the range of $1bn to $1.14bn, compared with previous guidance of $1.15bn to $1.3bn, a downgrade of 8.6 per cent.

Electricity gross profit is now expected to fall $250 million to $290m year on year, compared with the previous expected fall of $170m to $220m.

The news sent Origin shares down by 6.9 per cent, or 34c, to close at $4.62. AGL shares fell 3.6 per cent, or 43c, to $11.42.

AGL will write down $2.69bn in post-tax charges in its half-year results on February 11, after a deterioration in long-term wholesale energy prices and "challenging macro-economic conditions".

While it did not change its earnings guidance like Origin, AGL took a giant write-off hit reflecting $1.9bn in onerous contracts relating to its legacy wind farm offtake agreements, a $1.1bn increase to its environmental restoration provision and $532m in impairments across its coal and gas power stations. It maintained underlying annual profit guidance of $500m to $580m after slashing its profit forecast just prior to Christmas.

It noted the impairment of the natural gas assets is linked to the rise in environmental restoration provisions.

Average electricity spot prices have halved from a year ago to between $40 to $45 a megawatt hour range in most states as a flood of cheap renewables lowered daytime prices along with cheaper gas and coal and softer demand amid COVID-19.

Power prices averaged $44/MWh across most states in the December quarter, 38 per cent less than the same quarter in 2019 and the lowest December quarter wholesale price since 2014 with only NSW bucking the trend.

Origin also upgraded its full-year forecast for its Australian Pacific LNG business in Queensland. It now expects production to be in the range of 685-705 petajoules, up 0.7 per cent from the previous guidance of 675-705 PJ.
---
Wokesters: we don't care a Bean WELL done Rowan Atkinson in calling out the cancel culture and woke whingers (Cancel culture's no joke, 7/1). It reminds us that the minority seems to get everything they want, just like spoilt children chucking a tantrum until they get their way.

 They see their opinion as the only one that matters, and no discussion can be entered into. There is an old saying: "Empty vessels make the most sound." It is time for the majority to stand up and speak up, otherwise we will end up as a humourless, boring, downtrodden society too scared to say or do anything in case it might be misinterpreted or offend someone.

Joe Kovac, Prestons

WHAT many followers in the cancel culture mob rampaging through Australian, British and American history don't understand is that many of the people they would erase from history were the equivalent of today's progressive, woke and creative culture (Cancel culture's no joke, 7/1).

 It's also pertinent to note that it's not the names of those involved in the lynching that survive, it is their victims.

Bruce Collison, Banks, ACT

Christmas Island stay should be cut short For those who are sick of being in detention at Christmas Island, you only have yourselves to blame for being there (Christmas Island detainees set fires, run riot at centre, 7/1).

 If you didn't break the law you wouldn't be there, but you chose differently.  Peter Dutton and Scott Morrison can fix the problem by putting them all on the first planes out of here back to their country of origin.

 Mr Dutton needs to act swiftly to have them out of this country and have their families pay for the damages they've caused.

Narelle, Sydney

You read it here It is uncanny how the rise of the cancel culture and the notion of personal disinvestment is reflected so fore-tellingly in George Orwell's political prophecy novel, 1984 (Cancel culture's no joke, 7/1).

 The idea that people, including comedians, celebrities and other personalities are boycotted, or censored, essentially because of something they said or did within a past historical context, talks to the manner in which Orwell saw the mob-ruled culture maintaining power through "two-minute hate" periods where citizens were encouraged to publicly express their hatred for perceived enemies.

 I think the novel should be compulsory reading at schools.

Dr Jack Dikian, Mosman

Keeper laughter alive I totally agree that minorities are attempting to silence humour (Cancel culture's no joke, 7/1).

 I recall an episode of the Simpsons sending up Australia and our way of life - not one complaint, we laughed with the Yanks till our sides split.

 But making bad comments about a single person and attempting to demoralise that person at work or pleasure is a different story.

Peter Coote, Kings Park

It's a jumbo problem Well, Robert Irwin certainly created a kerfuffle by flying in a helicopter too low over a Tasmanian National Park (Crikey! That's a bit low, 7/1).  One must now wonder what furore will eventuate when hundreds of jumbo passenger planes will be skimming over our World Heritage Blue Mountains National Park during take-offs and landings.  The outcome will be deafening.

Alex Uren, Canowindra

Flight of fancy It seems the Tasmanian Wilderness is for the exclusive enjoyment of bushwalkers (Crikey! That's a bit low, 7/1).

 Bushwalker Meredith Thurstans is quoted saying: "It's just not on. You don't walk for three days and expect some peace and quiet then be buzzed by a helicopter." I hope she takes all her waste, including human, with her.

John Stuart, St Fillans

One for the road If drivers obeyed speed limits and current road rules and regulations, what is the issue whether mobile speed cameras are marked or unmarked (Letters, 7/1)? Obviously, common sense and responsibility no longer exist.

 These are also missing from other aspects of everyday life. David Crawford, Gwynneville

WHO? Why? Where?

China is blocking World Health Organisation investigators from entering the country (WHO's the boss? China blocks COVID team, 7/1). Why would this matter now? It is too late.

 The Chinese have had ample time to reshape Wuhan, remove evidence, even reprogram people. I think physically visiting Wuhan now is meaningless. It was all clear from day one that the virus was Chinese. We need to move on.

Mokhles K. Sidden, South Strathfield

Inspector hex If the Chinese government won't let WHO health inspectors visit the country, they must have something to hide (WHO's the boss? China blocks COVID team, 7/1).

 We could have found out where this COVID-19 virus originated. George Orban, Breakfast Point

Page turner Yesterday's Daily Telegraph sent me from laughing to tears in the turn of a page. Rowan Atkinson dressed in a Nazi uniform looked hilarious (Cancel Culture's no joke, 7/1), then turning the page to those two young boys killed in Wellington (Killed in 'idiot act', 7/1) was heartbreaking.

Gary McClean, Gymea

Mind over matter We have a worldwide pandemic which is causing deaths and a huge amount of infections. We are fearful of going out to shopping centres and restaurants. We are mindful of social distancing, washing our hands and wearing masks. We have people who have lost their jobs. Some businesses have gone bust. The travel industry is in tatters. The words "hotspots" and "clusters" have taken on new meaning. Our national debt is out of the ballpark. We've lived through arguably one of the worst years in history.

 Now we find that Lara Worthington is happy with her body (Mum's the word in body battle, 7/1).

How good is that?

Marg Swindells, Castle Hill

Just for openers What about Will Pucovski our new opening batsman for Australia?  For his young age he has shown in the 3rd Test that he has great concentration, determination and patience. Will, I can see you becoming one of our great batsmen.

 It is great to see one so young showing immense knowledge in his batting style.  Go Will, we will be watching you for years to come.

Barry, Hallidays Point

Briefly … ABC journalists and political commentators remind me very much of Donald Trump. Neither can acknowledge that a new government has been elected and has a clear mandate from the people.

John Partridge, Manly

* * * Just wondering if the government will use the new laws being legislated - trolling, bullying or offending anyone online - against the cancel culture clique. Give us back the right to choose what we watch.

Pat Murphy, Ermington

* * * Last year, crippling droughts and bushfires. This year, floods. I believe we're going to be $300bn in the hole because of COVID. Can't we cough up $10bn to build John Bradfield's dam system? He was a very clever bloke. Just do it!

Bill, Gosford

* * * As an avid reader of The Daily Telegraph for 50 years, I read the headline story then go to the Letters as it's good to read other's points of view, and Warren's cartoon puts a smile on my face. Next I read the obituary column and if my name is not there, I make a cup of tea and have a good day.

Ron, Granville

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
Like-minded countries should stand up to China as a unified trading bloc, writes James Morrow

China is panicking that its mishandling of the coronavirus is threatening its twin dreams of mass prosperity at home and dominating the world order abroad - and in doing so, has created an opportunity for Australia, the US, and other democracies to work together to enrich one another while reducing their economic dependence on the communist behemoth.

First, the panic.

Last Monday, a remarkable little article appeared in the English language version of the official Chinese Communist Party newspaper, People's Daily.

Showing the typical communist flare for snappy headline writing, the piece - entitled "To defeat COVID-19 pandemic calls for joint efforts from global media" - called for the world's media to help spread Chinese Communist Party propaganda and deflect blame from Beijing for allowing the coronavirus to get out of control and infect the world. The coronavirus is a "big test for global media", the piece by journalist He Yin said, and blamed "irresponsible media outlets" for "(undermining) international co-operation to fight the virus".

Instead of pointing the finger at China and demanding answers for just how the virus was created, Yin wrote that "all responsible media in the world should conscientiously resist stigmatisation and stand by justice" and suggested that pinpointing the virus's origin was a "racist act against a country and all its people".

Just coincidentally, this mirrors language used by the World Health Organisation, which earlier this year said the "stigma" around coronavirus was worse than the disease.

But what makes the document remarkable is not so much its weaponised wokeness as its call for media organisations to "give the message of … how counties fight together by looking (out) for and helping each other, and give the warm message of unity and strength".

It was a small but further sign of just how desperate Beijing has become to control a narrative that has gotten out of its control almost as quickly as the coronavirus - and which now threatens to scupper Chinese dictator Xi Jinping's "Chinese dream" of becoming a "moderately well-off society" by 2021, the 100th anniversary of the founding of the Chinese Communist Party.

This propaganda effort, which has included sending increasingly bellicose letters to this newspaper for our coverage of Beijing's handling of the coronavirus, hasn't worked that well so far in Australia.

Polling from the Lowy Institute released this week found that 68 per cent of Australians feel "less favourable to China's system of government".

Which is why it's so remarkable that at the same time, Beijing appears to be trying to push the trade button to get its way. In response to China's move to cut off Australian barley and beef and potentially imports of other products including wine this week, the response across much of the country was to say, fine, half your luck.

An attempt by Anthony Albanese, who has been all but invisible during this crisis, to accuse Scott Morrison of mismanaging our relationship with China thus hurting farmers, was quickly attacked by the AWU, a number of Labor MPs, and Bill Shorten who said it was "right to stand up for Aussie jobs and sovereignty".

It was the right response, and a welcome contrast to some business figures and lobbies who have seemed at times to push for conciliation at any price - including our sovereignty.

It was also a recognition that while China may be a bully, bullies tend to back down after a bit of challenge.

Because as much as Xi might like to pick a fight with Australia, with countries around the world likewise increasingly incensed by China's behaviour, the costs might not be worth the benefits.

Which is where the opportunity comes in. Australian food and other products are extremely popular with the rising Chinese middle classes, who not only covet products such as Ugg boots as status symbols, but also do not trust that local produce won't be fake or contaminated. The same Chinese government that can assign every citizen a social credit score cannot ensure the food supply is uncontaminated.

Likewise, Australia supplies 60 per cent of China's iron ore and 45 per cent of its natural gas, along with plenty of other raw materials like bauxite (which can be turned into aluminium) and copper.

Finding replacements for these commodities might not be as easy as Xi imagines. Scott Morrison is right to take the tone he has thus far taken with China, and the Australian people for the moment seem to back him - even if it means even more economic pain in the short term.

But any trade showdown with China will require co-operation between like-minded countries - perhaps, as AWU national secretary Daniel Walton suggested earlier in the week, in the spirit of NATO.

During the Cold War with the Soviet Union, the US and western Europe agreed that an attack on any member of NATO would be treated as an attack on all of them. Led by then-president Harry Truman, the basis for it was known as the Truman Doctrine.

China clearly believes that if it can't guilt western nations into shutting up about coronavirus because it's racist, it can use its purchasing power to get us to toe the line. We've seen this tactic used time and again against governments as well as businesses - recall Beijing's boycott of NBA teams last year after some players and fans spoke out against human rights abuses in Hong Kong.

If free trade is, as economists claim, a good thing, then surely that is only the case when it is between reasonably like-minded nations and with no political strings attached - who could also use their collective muscle to punish China if China attempted to punish one of their own.

The PM has a lot on his plate at the moment, but so do plenty of other countries dealing with similar issues with China and who are wondering how we'll go.

The Morrison Doctrine does have a bit of a ring to it, doesn't it?CATCH JAMES EVERY SUNDAY AT 9AM ON OUTSIDERS
---
ADELAIDE is set to be confirmed as the destination for the opening game of the State of Origin series and, for the first time, the sides may fly in and fly out on game day.

Officials from Queensland and NSW met with NRL and biosecurity experts on Friday as they began planning for the series. It is understood the NRL is still committed to playing the first game in Adelaide, although that will require negotiations with the SA government over protocols for the clash, as well as what size crowd will be allowed.

The states also need to finalise talks with the players' union over squad sizes and pay packets. The initial thought was that each state could select a squad of up to 24 players, although there are concerns even that may not be enough given the NRL's injury rate this season. The players also need to agree to pay packets. Origin players have traditionally received $30,000 a game but that figure will be slashed due to the fallout from COVID-19.

Sides usually spend the days leading into Origin promoting the game. But due to government protocols, they may have to fly in on the day of the game and depart immediately after. - THE AUSTRALIAN
---
Manners were better but the horrors were worse when the Spanish flu ripped through Australia, writes David Mills

Walt Disney and Greta Garbo both caught it. Donald Trump's grandfather Frederick Trump died from it. The Spanish flu outbreak of 1918-1919 killed somewhere between 50 and 100 million people across the globe, dwarfing the death toll from the "Great War" it sprang from, and transforming an already shell-shocked world in ways that few saw coming.

Such was the impact of the virus, average life expectancy in the US dropped by an entire decade because of it, says Melbourne-based historian Mary Sheehan, who is researching a PhD thesis on the outbreak. Unlike COVID-19, Spanish flu had the most deadly effect on adults in their prime, mainly those between the ages of 20 and 40. The first reported cases were soldiers on the Western Front in April 2018.

The Australia hit by Spanish flu in January 1919 was a radically different place to the nation we know today. Antibiotics were yet to be developed. There was no internet pumping out minute-by-minute news headlines; no social media to stir fears. International travel was by ship. The (all male) federal parliament sat in Melbourne.

The country was not spared. Some 15,000 people are estimated to have died from what they mainly referred to at the time as "pneumonic influenza", although the exact number is far from certain. Many deaths would have been ascribed to other causes such as heart failure. The death toll in some Aboriginal communities was reportedly as high as 50 per cent.

And yet: Australia did not cop it as bad as some.

Dr Peter Hobbins, Adjunct Fellow in History at the University of Sydney, says the disease tore a swath through New Zealand, killing an estimated 2 per cent of the population, whereas the death rate in Australia was about half of one per cent.

Stopped at the border The difference between the two countries was in their approach to quarantine. Tight controls in Australia delayed the virus coming ashore and made a huge difference to the scale and severity of the eventual epidemic.

"By October 1918, when the first ships carrying cases of pneumonic influenza arrived in Australian quarantine stations, we were very aware of how dangerous it was, and we had a very rigid quarantine system to keep those ships under observation until everybody on board was all clear," Dr Hobbins says.

Warnings poured in from around the world, especially from the US and South Africa, where port cities like Philadelphia and Cape Town suffered massive fatalities.

"We were well aware of what was going on around the world, both through the media and also through military medical channels and high-level government channels, which were sending reports of infected Australian soldiers and nurses, but also how it was affecting other armies and populations around the world," says Dr Hobbins.

The messages coming from across the Tasman proved to be especially crucial. "(New Zealand) sent a lot of urgent messages across, saying once it gets in, you won't be able to control it; be prepared; get all your measures in place," Dr Hobbins says.

Quarantine was eventually breached in January 1919 - probably because somebody deliberately circumvented it, says Dr Hobbins.

The measures put in place to deal with the crisis were drastic, although they varied from state to state. Schools did not open until March. Theatres, sporting fixtures and even libraries were shut down and mass events such as Brisbane's "Ekka" were cancelled.

In NSW, the wearing of masks in public was mandated, with a government decree stating that those who refused to wear facial coverings were "showing their indifference … for the lives of others".

In Victoria, pubs were closed, only to be reopened, after mass protests, on the proviso that they had no more than 20 people inside.

The impact on workplaces was immense. Dr Hobbins says a survey of several hundred companies in NSW at the end of 1919 revealed about 36 per cent of employees had needed to take time off work for influenza that year.

In Melbourne, says Mary Sheehan, "the police were seriously affected [by absences], and many people were taking advantage of the lesser police presence".

Quarantine stations were established throughout the country, with a major camp near Adelaide University reportedly having a markedly convivial, picnic atmosphere.

But for those who got sick, treatment was grim. Little could be done for them except good nursing care and keeping them hydrated to avert fever.

Health authorities in Melbourne made a critical early mistake in shutting 15 makeshift community hospitals in March 1919, believing that the virus was petering out, Ms Sheehan says.

"There were three waves of the virus in Melbourne. The first, which was a little bit milder, started in January but it began to peter out in March.

"The government thought it was all over. They closed a lot of the emergency hospitals and no longer required mandatory reporting of cases, but then it really ramped up again in April, and that really tested the whole health system," she says.

"There were also limited numbers of doctors and nurses because many were still overseas, so there were huge challenges."

States of origin Differences in approach eventually led the states to shut their borders for the first time since Federation.

"In November 1918 the Commonwealth and the states agreed that they wouldn't close the borders, and that the Commonwealth would have responsibility for all quarantine decisions," says Dr Hobbins.

"Unfortunately that agreement didn't last long. By mid-January in 1919 there were cases in Victoria but they weren't definitively diagnosed as pneumonic influenza, because of course normal flu was still doing the rounds as well.

"So Victoria didn't announce that they were infected, but several cases travelled from Melbourne to Sydney … and so in response NSW closed the border with Victoria and broke the agreement with the Commonwealth." The crisis may have breathed new life into old suspicions between the states, but it seems most ordinary Australians resisted the temptation to break bad.

Ms Sheehan says while there were some reports of disturbances at inoculation sites, where people rushed to get to the front of the line, most people were well-behaved and there were many examples of community-mindedness on show.

"There was incredible spirit," she says. "These groups had formed during the war, so you had women's groups who would provide food for their local emergency hospital. People would put 'SOS' signs in their front door if they needed help, and women would go in and nurse them and clean and wash. It was really very impressive." And there was no panic buying of grocery staples, she adds.

"People didn't have the money or resources to panic buy; I haven't come across any evidence of that," she says. "People were living hand to mouth, many of them, particularly after the privations of the war.

"They had stopped wage increases, but that didn't stop price increases on goods, so that made it even harder for people to stockpile." The Spanish flu crisis has been underrated for the role it played in helping shape Australia's national character, Dr Hobbins believes.

"The community had spent four years fighting this foreign war, and then in the fifth year, in 1919, the fighting was over but there was a new war, except it was on Australian soil and it was the same sorts of people who pulled together yet again to provide welfare and community support," he says."Many talk about how Australia was born in the First World War … but I think that the way local communities, families, church groups, voluntary organisations and local councils pulled together in 1919 in the face of this overwhelming crisis, also confirmed a newer sense of national community, and that went right down to the levels of individual neighbourhoods."
---
VIRUS ORIGINS AUSTRALIA'S former intelligence chief says it is possible COVID-19 could have leaked from a Wuhan laboratory and says a security review needs to be conducted of similar sites globally in the wake of the coronavirus pandemic.

Dennis Richardson, former head of foreign affairs, defence and ASIO, has also revealed there have been breaches of protocol at Australia's biosecurity laboratories, making the point "accidents do occur".

It comes amid extraordinary admissions by Chinese scientists that the wet market was not the source of the COVID-19 outbreak.

The Daily Telegraph can also reveal the Wuhan Institute of Virology, at the centre of a global probe into the outbreak of COVID-19, was given permission to engage in experimental research involving pathogenic viruses just 10 days before the first recorded case.

Mr Richardson (pictured) said while the origin of COVID-19 is not yet known, there should be a security review of high-level bio-containment facilities where deadly bat-derived coronaviruses are handled around the world.

"I think the security around such laboratories always has to be subject to review and I think everyone would hope that part of the review in respect of COVID-19 would be looking at security of facilities globally," he said.

"That is something which we need to be alert to globally. We have such facilities here in Australia and I do know that in the past there have been one or two accidents, at least on one occasion in the past that has been in the media.

"So accidents do occur. Just how good China's security is for its level 4 laboratories I simply don't know. The point I'm making is that accidents can happen regardless of the level of security and accidents have happened at level 4 facilities globally and it wouldn't surprise me if they've happened in China because they have happened elsewhere." On the prospect of an inadvertent leak of a naturally--occurring virus from a Wuhan laboratory, Mr Richardson said: "Put it this way, it is a possibility. However, I don't think it is wise to be pressing one possibility over another at this point.

"If you genuinely are interested in having a review, then it is absolutely essential that we have China's co-operation. We're not going to get China's co-operation if before the review even starts we have people drawing conclusions and wanting to throw around accusations without evidence." The Department of Agriculture told The Daily Telegraph there have been 37 breaches of biological material at biosecurity containment laboratories approved for research, analysis or testing of imported biological material since June 2013 out of 4563 audits. These related to the release, imminent release or movement of goods that are subject to biosecurity control or a "deliberate failure to comply with a departmental action." The Department of Health, which oversees a regulatory scheme for Security Sensitive Biological Agents, refused to reveal how many accidents there had been in its labs.
---
JUSTICE LEAGUE: THE SNYDER CUT * * * * 1/2 Director Zack Snyder Starring Henry Cavill, Ben Affleck, Gal Gadot Rating MA15+ Running time 242 mins Verdict Justice is finally served

Joss Whedon's 2017 version of Justice League was hated by fans and panned by critics but the restoration of director Zack Snyder's original vision makes up for all that.

For those who are new to the story, Snyder was the original director who walked away after the tragic suicide of his daughter Autumn. Studio Warner Bros asked Avengers director Whedon to come in and reshoot what was an essentially finished movie but his attempts to make Snyder's version funnier annoyed DC fans and the film took less than half of what the Avengers movies were bringing in.

The widespread shutdown of the film industry due to COVID-19 provided the perfect opportunity for Snyder to polish his version and release it as a four-hour film.

This film is both familiar and completely new. CGI villain Steppenwolf is still trying to find three boxes of power so he can destroy the Earth and rule it in the name of his evil lord Darkseid.

Batman is still trying to put together a team of Wonder Woman, The Flash, Aquaman and Cyborg to stop him.

But the way it is done is totally different. The Flash and Cyborg go from minor players to really driving the story now.

The action sequences, especially the Amazonian battle against Steppenwolf, are far better. The return of Superman is handled perfectly and the strange "Knightmare" sequence, in which Batman envisages a future where Superman turns evil, now makes sense.

Yes, four hours is obviously too much without a break but Snyder has broken it into six chapters, which form natural pause points during the streaming experience.

The film also serves as an origin story for The Flash and Cyborg, and ties more directly into Jason Momoa's Aquaman movie.

The only problem is it sets up multiple sequels in the epilogue. The thought of not seeing a Justice League 2 and 3 where all of these play out is the only disappointment.

To mangle the old saying, Justice is a dish best served cold. ON BINGE AND FOXTEL
---
THE COVID-19 pandemic has left us with some -lasting social change and a myriad of new health -protocols that will undoubtedly remain long after this is over.

The virus has touched every part of society. It has been incredibly sad for so many families who have lost loved ones and life-shattering for those whose livelihoods have not recovered. But it has also been a live reminder of the kind of innovative thinking and can-do attitudes that have made this country great.

As in previous dark times in our history, people have turned to sport to help them through the trauma of lockdown and financial stress - and many of the individual sports have risen to the challenge during COVID more than at any other point in history.

In the past two weeks we have had successful Grand -Finals for the NRL and AFL - the latter -attracting incredible TV viewing numbers. And the racing industry in all states has worked hard to -continue race meetings within strict pandemic health protocols.

This has not been the case in many countries overseas in which governments have baulked on taking on critics who decided sport should not be a priority in official COVID management plans.

They also shied away from the additional costs -associated with providing safe environments for the players and officials while the competitions were under way.

Thankfully, most governments and sporting authorities in Australian were not that squeamish, -especially in NSW where the state government has given the NRL and racing permission, in particular, to not only operate but also allow COVID-safe crowds attend events live.

The determination in Australia to keep going has not only kept thousands of people in jobs, both -directly and indirectly, but has provided a distraction for fans crying out for some joy and activity in their lives.

Next week the NRL will run a fast-forward style State of Origin series. Three games over three weeks in different states.

As well as being bound by a strict COVID bubble, the series is unique in that it is being run over a -shorter period of time and outside the normal NRL season.

This could be a classic example of invention borne out of necessity and could signal a permanent change to the Origin tradition.

The NRL, players and fans should keep an open mind as this series plays out and consider whether it could work post-pandemic.

It certainly ticks a few boxes: It fills the gap between the end of the NRL season and the beginning of the cricket season proper, it means clubs don't lose key players during the season to Origin duties or injuries and the quicker format could add an extra dose of excitement. It is worth considering.

ARL Commission chairman Peter V'landys has said he wants to let the viewer numbers decide the fate of State of Origin being held in November.

But whatever happens, the NRL administration deserves more kudos for ingenuity. It wouldn't be the first time V'Landys pulled off a miracle.
---
AUSTRALIA has asked powerful world leaders, including China, to consider an independent committee headed by a top UK health expert to lead an inquiry into the origins of the coronavirus.

The federal Government is using every available inter-national channel, including private talks with the Chinese Government and formally writing to the G20, to seek support for an independent review into the COVID-19 pandemic response.

In a letter to G20 leaders this week Prime Minister Scott Morrison outlined two possible mechanisms for an independent review, believing some existing groups were well placed to make recommendations to the World Health Organisation.

One option was to have the Independent Oversight and Advisory Committee for the WHO Emergencies Program lead the inquiry. It is understood Australia sees the committee, led by UK public health expert Dr Felicity Harvey, as almost purpose built for the review.

The second option put forward by Mr Morrison to G20 leaders was to use WHO's International Health Regulations which is an agreement between all WHO member nations to build their capacity to detect, assess and report public health events.

Australia is hoping to build a coalition of the willing to support an inquiry, which Mr Morrison has emphasised is about learning the lessons of the outbreak, rather than targeting any one country.It is understood the government hopes its upfront -approach will be successful.
---
NSW has recorded a dozen new COVID-19 infections, including one with an -unknown origin.

Health authorities yesterday announced there had been 12 new infections in the 24 hours to 8pm Wednesday, including 10 which are linked with existing clusters and one in hotel quarantine.

One case was also detec-ted which couldn't be traced to existing clusters of the -disease.

The funeral gathering cluster has grown to 46 after six people linked to the outbreak tested positive. Two cases have also connected with the Thai Rock Wetherill Park and another two with the Apollo in Potts Point. The new infections come as health authorities issue a new warning to anyone who visited Kids Learning Academy in Busby on July 29 after an infectious child attended the venue.
---
MORE than half of NSW's coronavirus cases caught the infection while abroad, and now figures from the health department reveal where they had come from.

According to NSW Health data, Australians travelling home from Pakistan, the US, UK, India, and cruise ship passengers, are responsible for 58 per cent of coronavirus infections in quarantine.

The vast majority of those returning from overseas are Australian residents who live and work abroad.

Since March 29, there have been 786 confirmed COVID-19 cases among returned travellers, the vast majority of whom are Australian nationals.

The figures suggest cruise passengers and crew accounted for 16 per cent - 125 people. These cases involved international cruise ships, not ships that have docked in Australia. About 14 per cent were Australians returning from Pakistan (109 people), 11 per cent came from the US (87 people), 8.8 per cent from Britain (69 people) and 8.5 per cent from India (67 people). The figures come after NSW recorded six consecutive days of zero community transmission
---
AS the NRL reshuffles the 2020 season amid the COVID-19 pandemic, a key idea being floated is a three-game grand final series. And in a further departure from tradition, there's talk two of those matches could be played in Queensland. Reporters CHRIS HONNERY and DEAN RITCHIE argue this divisive issue.

FOR- CHRIS HONNERY It should never have taken a global pandemic to get Queensland to host an NRL grand final but here we are.

The Sydney-centric rugby league hierarchy has finally conceded that a grand final north of the border could be the best thing for the game, while also giving Maroon-blooded supporters what they have been crying out for, for years. And not just one big dance but possibly two as part of a three-game series.

NSW has hosted the biggest game of the rugby league calendar for years and now it has to be Queensland's turn. We've got the shiny new Queensland Country Bank Stadium in Townsville, which would undoubtedly have north Queenslanders hanging from the rafters just to catch a glimpse of an NRL decider.

Meanwhile, down in the capital lies the world's greatest rugby league ground - Suncorp Stadium.

The 52,500-seat fortress and its arterial Caxton St thoroughfare would be lined with rugby league supporters of every kind when it becomes the epicentre of the rugby league world.

There should be no hesitation in hosting the best-of-three grand-final series here in Queensland. There is the potential to generate up to $50 million for a cash-strapped code that is struggling to make ends meet amid the crippling coronavirus pandemic.

Under the proposal, the SCG would host the first match and Suncorp would be the scene of the second.

Which means Sydneysiders would be kept happy while at the same time Queenslanders would be given their long-awaited grand final match.

It's a win-win situation.

AGAINST- DEAN RITCHIE Two grand finals for the two heads.

Two chances … Buckley's and none.

The sheer arrogance of Queensland is as bewildering as it is inexplicable. Despite falling away badly as a rugby league state, Queensland actually has the audacity to demand hosting two deciders - one in Brisbane, the other in Townsville - in a proposed three-match grand final series.

Queensland, get it through your sun-affected brains, Sydney is the home of rugby league and has been for 112 years. You have no right to one grand final, let alone two.

Last year in the NRL, Queensland sides won 24 of 72 games. That's a miserable 33 per cent success rate. And we shouldn't forget Queensland crashed to a second successive State of Origin series defeat.

I was actually a fan of the proposed Quexit - a move that would have resulted in Queensland being cut loose from the rest of Australia.

Queensland tourism minister Kate Jones said: "Queensland deserves these matches. Anything short of two grand finals at Suncorp and in Townsville will be a slap in the face to Queensland footy fans. We've been strung along too long." Well Ms Jones, we've been strung along too by this parochial nonsense, claiming Queensland is superior to all other states.

I'm not a fan of three grand finals but I'm even less of a fan of Queensland trying to pinch our tradition, history and folklore.

Ms Jones said: "A grand final in Queensland would be a ray of sunshine."Well Queensland, you can stick that idea where the sun don't shine.
---
SYDNEY criminals are getting caught with millions in cash as the pandemic shatters their efforts to launder money through casinos and poker machines, NSW Police and other law enforcement agencies said.

In the latest seizure, police allegedly found $1m (pictured) in cash at the East Hills home of a relative of a Middle Eastern crime family after they stopped his car on Friday afternoon in Riverwood. Police also allegedly found cocaine and $120,000 in cash hidden in secret compartments in the car.

"It appears criminals are holding a lot more cash at the moment as they can't launder their money in traditional means because of the restrictions placed on them by COVID-19," Detective Superintendent Martin Fileman of the NSW Organised Crime Squad said. "We are catching people with cash more frequently from amounts of tens of thousands of dollars up to the millions." Border closures have also hit crime syndicates who often move money interstate to clean cash.

Det. Supt. Fileman said there are now huge amounts of cash sitting in homes and storage facilities waiting to be laundered.

"The amount in those units would run into the hundreds of millions," he said. Other senior law enforcement officers told The Telegraph that a drop in foreign students has also hampered laundering syndicates.

"Foreign students are often used to remit money to overseas bank accounts and then transferred back in a variety of ways in an attempt to hide its origins," the officer said.

He said it also could explain the recent spike in gangsters kidnapping each other and holding them for ransom. "They know that they are having problems moving cash so that makes them very attractive targets for extortion," he said.
---
Opportunity and adversity are close cousins in sport. One inspires the other if done right. If not, it can be a disaster.

Brad Fittler was talking to Johnathan Thurston last Friday and Thurston got to talking about Mal Meninga taking over as Queensland coach in 2006. That's a heavyweight line-up of league champions right there.

Thurston talked about Meninga's first game as Queensland coach, and of how he spoke in camp of Queensland's first Origin players, and what they endured, and of how a big part of why they did what they did was for the Queenslanders in their past, with no idea what they would create for the Queenslanders of the future.

Meninga was part of that first Origin game back in 1980. He turned 20 the day of the game. When he took over as coach NSW had won the previous three series and the future looked bleak.

Fittler skips from breezy to deep thought often. By the time he called in to Triple M the following day, Thurston's story had swirled around in his head, and Fittler did what he can do and distilled it into a solid paragraph of pure thought.

"Every player that played State of Origin knew there was a genuine reason why it succeeded," he said.

Fittler is the NSW coach but his comments had nothing to do with playing Origin this year or where or when it should be. He was speaking to the players about returning next month.

"I see this as a similar opportunity to all the players that will have to sacrifice. They are going to have to go and live in other countries, other states, for a couple of weeks or a couple of months, whatever it is.

"In time we will be talking about those players in the same sort of vein and saying these are the sacrifices they took and we will be able to build camaraderie and spread what the players did in 2020. I feel at the moment a few of them feel like they're going to be doing it for nothing but, I can tell you, if I was coaching a team in five years' time or 10 years' time, the first thing I would be talking about is what the players did in 2020." There is magnificent opportunity in the game at present. For the players and the code itself. Yesterday the ARL Commission chairman Peter V'landys locked himself away in a room with Channel 9 boss Hugh Marks and Foxtel boss Patrick Delany, confirming nothing but the May 28 resumption.

Marks was difficult throughout the meeting, pushing for a short season. The T20 World Cup starts October 18.

Marks wants a 17-round competition, including the two already played, which makes an October 4 grand final. Fox Sports and the NRL prefer a longer season.

Yesterday's meeting ended with the intent to come back once more is known about whether the cricket goes ahead or not. Sadly, Marks has shown no appetite to play beyond October 4 even if the Cup is canned. He has already told his shareholders of the saving that will come Nine's way if no footy is played, the costs falling with each round less on the draw.

The high-powered meetings will decide the NRL's immediate health. Same as the COVID-19 crisis has exposed the fault lines within the game, there are numerous problems that have been masked by years of mismanagement at the NRL.

The broadcast deal was inflated, the salary cap, football club spending, all above what the game could sustain. Clubs were poor at running their business, caught in an arms race, head office unable to control them. Participation rates are falling and get puffed up with hollow numbers from clinics and school visits. Pathways are a disaster. The state leagues are struggling.

League Central lost its way years ago and, like a bad businessman stashing a catalogue of bad deals, had no way to correct itself without also exposing itself. A crash was inevitable.

In this absurd way the pandemic could be good for rugby league. It provides the game, right now, the opportunity to correct itself without having to suffer through the embarrassment of going through it alone because the whole world is also suffering.

The game crashes as the world crashes. So it is important to get the correction right.

The game was moving as one this week, with a May 28 resumption stamped, when RLPA chief Clint Newton questioned why others involved in the Apollo meetings claimed they were set to resume on May 28.

"We have to have a level of protection there and to assist with compliance and behavioural change," Newton said. "That's just not players - it is industry-wide." It was an untimely comment. It created pause when the game needs momentum. V'Landys has held high-pressure meetings with the broadcasters, is negotiating a new deal he hopes to finalise next week, lobbied government in three states and two countries to get teams moving again and, when it all looked set to go, turned to face hesitation from within.

Clubs' finances are so stretched the clubs can't afford to waste even a dollar. They can't begin facilitating all that needs to be done until they have a start date. The date has to come first.

The players will be better looked after than anybody in the country once they return to their clubs.

What's left is to give a little back.

Today's player carries a debt not acknowledged enough, the kind Fittler picked up on in his chat with Thurston. They play the game in the era of the billion-dollar broadcast deal and their truth is this deal was delivered on the back of those who came before them. The money was earned in their past, not this present.

The negotiation at the last Collective Bargaining Agreement was built around today's players demanding to be partners in the game. They argued they were the ones who put on the show so should be entitled to the big coin.

All agreed, and then the NRL went and put several players at each club on third-party marketing contracts to do publicity. It was not all the players' fault. Once they got their partnership they baulked at doing more, as they had indicated, and so the NRL offered them more money to activate them.

So last year one player, an international, picked up an extra $70,000 in NRL funding for media appearances. That is just one example. There are countless others. Another international picked up an extra $40,000-odd a few years back while injured, doing what he pretty much would have been doing anyway.At some point there has to be proper buy-in from the players. Now is the time for the players to show that playing the game is not simply a transaction. The old stories players tell are not stories of wealth, but of sacrifice and commitment above normal. Thurston still remembers Meninga's talk, 14 years later, and Meninga still remembers what happened 40 years ago. The opportunity for something greater is here.
---
Record of poor practices coming to light from Wuhan Centre of Disease Control It's the lower security, and lower profile, Wuhan laboratory near the now infamous wet market where exotic animals, but not bats, are for sale.

The world has focused on the Wuhan Institute of Virology and its leading scientist, Shi Zhengli, who has become famous for her risky research, genetically altering bat-derived coronaviruses.

But the Wuhan Centre for Disease Control, which is closer to the wet market, has gone largely unnoticed in the outbreak of the virus.

This is changing and it's now becoming a site of great interest to experts and intelligence agencies analysing the spread of COVID-19.

The Wuhan Centre for Disease Control has a long history of poor safety practices.

There have been highly-concerning breaches of protocol where potentially virus-ridden bats came into direct contact with researchers not wearing protective equipment.

One senior scientist, Tian Junhua, went on the record to talk about how he was scratched, bitten and even urinated on by bats while taking samples out in the field.

"We can easily get contact with the faeces of bats which contaminate everything. So it is highly risky here. I feel the fear. The fear of infections," he said in a video posted in December, 2019.

Does this sound like a laboratory you would entrust with the role of handling highly-pathogenic coronavirus samples?

Absolutely not.

Yet, this is where some of the earliest samples of what was then understood to be a new pneumonia-like illness may have been sent.

Matthew Henderson, director of British think-tank, Henry Jackson Society's Asia Studies Centre, said when people first started falling ill and were hospitalised in December with an unknown virus, he believes their samples were likely sent to the Wuhan Centre for Disease Control for testing.

He expects intelligence agencies to now be having a closer look at the WCDC. "It is extremely important. (Shi Zhengli) was called back from Shanghai on the night of 30th December to receive that evening samples that were passed on at WIV from work that had been done by the Wuhan Centre for Disease Control," Mr Henderson said.

"(The WCDC) had been looking for some time at samples from patients taken from hospitals who had this novel coronavirus disease." The former British diplomat in East Asia, who spent a large part of his career in the British Foreign and Commonwealth Office, said the Wuhan Centre for Disease Control was likely also sampling the very first coronavirus in early December.

"The main work on this new virus that they'd taken samples from quite early in December, that work has not been done at the Wuhan Institute of Virology, it's been done somewhere else. To me the obvious candidate is WCDC," he said.

A dossier prepared by concerned western governments into China's cover-up of coronavirus, which I reported on a month ago, stated as part of China's "suppression and destruction of evidence" that "virus samples (were) ordered destroyed at genomics labs." Since then, China has admitted to destroying early samples of the virus. But authorities said they did so only in laboratories unauthorised to handle the highly-infectious virus.

Mr Henderson said it is likely that the Wuhan Centre for Disease Control was one of the laboratories required to destroy samples that had already been sent there because it did not have the highest level 4 biosecurity authorisation.

My Sky News mini-documentary tomorrow night, that looks at the laboratories at the centre of a global probe into the origins of the virus, reveals the Wuhan Centre for Disease Control censored the search of "bats" on their website.

Presumably this is to deflect attention from any work they were doing relating to bat-sampling.

Some of this material is already in the public domain.

"A scientist there who had a long career of working on bat sampling, he boasted in the press about how he had been peed on and scratched and had blood on him and had had to self-isolate at least twice," Mr Henderson said.

"He regarded his work as so important he was going to carry on anyway. He said on one occasion he even forgot to take his protective clothing along to do some sampling in the field.

"He was also working on lab ventures, he and his colleagues were working with samples taken from patients with COVID-19.

"If that's the way they were doing their samples in the field, that's the way they were treating biosecurity, it is a reasonable inference, that probably standards there were not so high." Accidents and leaks in laboratories are not uncommon.

A 2004 SARS outbreak was the result of safety breaches at a top Beijing virology laboratory where two young scientists were infected. I look at the safety issues of both Wuhan biosecurity laboratories in a Sky News "special" tomorrow night at 7.30pm. The repeated breaches of protocol at the labs, and the warnings that were ignored, clearly paint the picture of a bio-accident waiting to happen.
---
A 10-MINUTE conference call between a rugby league Immortal and the Eels' spine has transformed unbeaten Parramatta into premiership contenders.

The Daily Telegraph can reveal rugby league legend Andrew Johns is involved in a weekly pre-captain's run loud speaker tutorial with Parramatta's spine - fullback Clint Gutherson, five-eighth Dylan Brown, hooker Reed Mahoney and halfback Mitch Moses.

Eels coach Brad Arthur calls the four stars into his office before the final training session each week to run through a tip sheet with Johns, who is called on a mobile phone.

Parramatta's halves coach can't personally attend due to COVID-19 restrictions. With Arthur and Johns offering a comprehensive tip sheet, Moses, Brown, Gutherson and Mahoney have guided Parramatta to four straight wins to start this season.

And Parramatta's unbeaten run will be tested again tomorrow night in what should be an enthralling Western Sydney derby against Penrith, who are also undefeated.

"The boys are in my office before captain's run and we put Joey on speaker and he talks to them for five to 10 minutes, the four of them, and myself," Arthur said.

"The four will sit down and we will ring Joey about the next game. It's good to throw ideas around from someone different and have another set of eyes on us.

"Joey will reiterate to the spine what we have pushed during the week - staying calm and where there might be some opportunities.

'Penrith will use this defence so we need to be ready. Do not pull the trigger too early'. Any help we can get as a side, a club and me, as a coach, it's unreal. Ever since Joey came on board he wanted to work within our system. He isn't telling the spine something different to what I am. We are working together.

"Joey will often ring Mitchell or Dylan on their own as well for a one-on-one but he won't go overboard and bombard them.

"I also talk to Joey after each game. He offers me ideas and tips. He wants to coach how we want to play. We both share similar views on what works for our team." Johns has played a key role in Moses' emergence as a NSW Origin candidate this year.

The eight Immortal, Johns has mentored Moses, who is arguably the NRL's form halfback this season.

"He has a stack of natural talent," Johns said. "The talent was always there for him. He just seems a lot calmer, his kicking game has been dynamite and the way he is controlling the team.

"He sees the game really well and is quick. I've been really impressed with him this year. With the new rules, the attacking kicking game is so important now and he has been nailing that.

"Everything you've been told as a halfback doesn't really drop until you're in your mid-20s. The game will slow down from a visual point of view for him now - as you get older the game slows." Arthur gave an insight into the Johns-Moses conversations.

"He talks about staying in control, not going for the big play all the time, earn the right, build pressure, be patient, rather than trying to pull the trigger all the time and how you earn your points at the end of a game," Arthur said. "Mitchell is maturing with his footy. Joey talks to him about kick finishes, thinking about setting up sets for his kicks, more so than worrying about 'attack, attack, attack' all the time. That will come." Moses' uncle, the great Kangaroos hooker Benny Elias, added: "The work Mitchell has done with Joey in the off-season, it's been invaluable. He has gone to the next level, having one of the greats look after him in the off-season. "He has put on some beef and his defence has improved 400 per cent. He is very strong and is far more confident and mature. It's no surprise why Parramatta are undefeated."
---
THE COVID FILES TOP MILITARY SCIENTIST HAS TIES WITH CSIRO

A SCIENTIST employed by China's People's Liberation Army, who has been genetically modifying coronaviruses and studying transmission from animals to humans, has had a longstanding professional relationship with the director of Australia's top bio-containment facility.

The Daily Telegraph can reveal the director of Australia's Animal Health Laboratory Dr Trevor Drew had a working relationship for at least seven years with a senior scientist employed by the PLA's Academy of Military Medical Sciences, Dr Tu Changchun.

The Daily Telegraph has obtained photographs of Dr Drew's visits to meet with Dr Tu in 2009 and 2016. One photo shows him smiling and holding Dr Tu up in the air during this trip.

Their relationship was forged through the Jilin University, where Dr Drew was a visiting professor of virology from 2009 to 2014 and, maintaining a relationship, visited again in 2016 while on a trip to China to lead "projects to improve China's capacity for the prevention, detection and control of rabies and Swine Fever." Jilin University, in the city of Changchun in China's northeast province, has -secret-level security credentials, "allowing it to participate in research and production for classified weapons and defence technology projects", according to Australian security analysts who have classified it "very high risk" for its high level of defence research.

The revelation comes amid calls from members of the Morrison Government for a federal oversight body to ensure there is no foreign -interference in the research sector, and to give checks and balances to foreign partnerships.

As well as being a -researcher at the Institute of Military Veterinary Medicine of the Chinese PLA's Academy of Military Medical Sciences, Tu Changchun is also a professor at Jilin University, according to both his biography and a now-deleted press-release on the university's website.

GENETIC ENGINEERING In his biography, his research direction is listed as "virus disease" and a description of his scientific research projects centres on genetic engineering of viruses.

At Dr Tu's page at the Jilin University website, it speaks about his work genetically modifying coronaviruses and other infectious diseases to see if they are transmissible to humans.

"Research on the source of SARS coronavirus transmission: by means of gene amplification, serological detection and virus isolation, the detection, isolation and identification of coronavirus in wild animals and domestic animals and poultry, so as to find the animal origin of SARS virus and study the virus the origin," an excerpt from his page at Jilin University states.

"Then, through animal -inoculation tests, SARS virus susceptible animals are screened to study the animal-human transmission route." Along with many other Chinese researchers in this field, Changchun Tu's research affiliated with the Academy of Military Medical Sciences often involves finding new diseases that come from animals.

MILITARY RESEARCH The Academy of Military Sciences is the highest-level research institute of the -People's Liberation Army, -according to PLA Daily.

The Australian Strategic Policy Institute's China's defence university tracker states that Jilin University works closely with China's nuclear weapons complex and hosts at least two defence research labs.

 They are located in its College of Computer Science and Technology and in the College of Chemistry. "Its Key Laboratory of Attack and Defence Simulation Technology for Naval Warfare, Ministry of Education is involved in -cybersecurity research for the Navy," the ASPI project states. "The lab's academic committee is headed by a computer scientist from China Aerospace Science and Technology Corporation, a leading state-owned missile manufacturer." Dr Tu is also listed on the Wuhan Institute of Virology's website as sitting on the scientific advisory committee of its Centre for Emerging -Infectious Diseases - the -institute at the centre of the global probe into the origins of the coronavirus.

The Daily Telegraph has previously revealed that two scientists from the Wuhan -Institute of Virology, Shi Zhengli and Peng Zhou, who are a focus of the Five Eyes -intelligence probe into the -origins of COVID-19, have worked at the CSIRO in Australia where they conducted research on live bats.

This Wuhan Institute of Virology committee on which Dr Tu sits is headed by Linfa Wang, according to the website. Dr Linfa Wang, while an Honorary Professor of the Wuhan Institute of Virology between 2005 and 2011 also worked in the CSIRO Office of the Chief Executive Science Leader in Virology -between 2008 and 2011.

OVERSIGHT DEMANDS There is no suggestion Dr Drew has engaged in any untoward or unethical research through his relationship with Dr Tu. Questions for him were answered by the CSIRO.

A spokesman for the CSIRO said Dr Drew did not receive a salary or any financial benefit from Jilin Uni-versity and has never studied bat diseases. The CSIRO -defended its links with other research institutes.

"To enable collaboration, CSIRO employees are often members of affiliate research institutes, committees and other bodies both in Australia and overseas. When entering into any such arrangement, CSIRO staff are bound by CSIRO's code of conduct and related policies and procedures," it said.

Liberal MPs including Matt Canavan, Sarah Henderson and Jim Molan say partnerships between Australia and Chinese universities show an oversight body is needed to -maintain integrity in the -research sector which is among those vulnerable to foreign influence.

The Australian Strategic Policy Institute lists Jilin University as "very high risk for its high level of defence -research and links to China's nuclear weapons program".

Its project states Jilin University is directly under the Ministry of Education and came under the joint supervision of the ministry and -defence industry agency, SASTIND, in 2016.

ASPI's executive director, Peter Jennings said Chinese President Xi Jinping has brought China's university sector closer to the PLA and intelligence. "We need to now look much more carefully at those partnerships with Chinese universities to make sure there are no military implications and in particular areas of research that Australia could be doing that could benefit the PLA," he said.The CSIRO has refused to publish details of its Chinese partnerships.
---
SOCIAL distancing and masks weren't on th-e menu at one of Sydney's hippest markets as it reopened for the first time in months.

Despite Australian Medical Association warnings about young people and hospitality businesses' casual attitude to social distancing, observers say shoppers at Carriageworks Farmers Market in Redfern were way too close for comfort.

The market draws high-end fresh food and beverage producers from all over Greater Sydney, but, until yesterday, had been closed since late March.

"The stalls were still pretty close together and there were a lot of people hanging around; it's hardly the sort of get-in-and-out style shopping experience that you see at the supermarkets," one man, who did not want to be named, said.

"There were some stallholders without masks." A female masked shopper said: "I'd say about half the people are wearing masks and the social distancing seemed OK." On its website Carriageworks said it was limiting numbers to 350 people as well as banning both BYO coffee cups and tastings.

On Saturday the state recorded its lowest COVID-19 statistics in more than two weeks, with nine infections in the 24 hours to 8pm on Friday.

It's the first time NSW's cases have dipped below double figures since July 24, when seven cases were -recorded.

One of the new cases is a student of Tangara School for Girls in Cherrybrook in Sydney's northwest.

The school has been closed for cleaning and contact tracing is continuing, with the source of infection under investigation.

The origin of that and two other infections remain a mystery to NSW Health contact tracers.

Australian Medical Association NSW president Dr Danielle McMullen said the numbers were nothing to get excited about.

"I am more concerned now than I have been at any other time during this pandemic because we do have cases of community transmission and we don't know where all of them are coming from," she said.

"We also know that people are tired of lockdowns now and there are both businesses and individuals that are not necessarily taking it as seriously as they should.

"It is hard for businesses, but they really need to be doing it at the moment - particularly hospitality." Dr McMullen said many young people's disregard for social distancing was of particular concern and that "I don't know how we get the messages out to younger people if they are not engaging with traditional media".
---
Exclusive: Lib MP calls for end to foreign research trips

A LIBERAL Senator has called for all virus research by foreign scientists in Australian laboratories to stop until a safety and national security review is done.

The call from Morrison government member Sarah Henderson follows revelations by The Daily Telegraph that the CSIRO's bio-containment facility in Geelong, Victoria has been engaging in research jointly funded by the Australian and Chinese governments.

The studies were in conjunction with the Wuhan Institute of Virology which is now at the centre of a global probe into the origins of the COVID-19 outbreak.

"I am calling on the CSIRO's Australian Animal Health Laboratory - now known as the Australian Centre for Disease Preparedness - to conduct a full review into its virus research program involving foreign nationals," she said.

Former Defence Minister and shadow cabinet member Joel Fitzgibbon backed the calls for an independent review last night.FULL REPORT PAGE 6
---
BRAD Fittler has been rewarded for becoming the first NSW coach to win back-to- back series in 14 years with a one-year contract extension.

Fittler was yesterday re-signed until the end of next year, taking his tenure to at least a fourth year in charge of the Blues.

It means he will become the third-longest-serving NSW coach, behind Phil Gould and Laurie Daley.

"I am really grateful for the NSWRL board's strong show of faith in me and our Origin and pathways program," Fittler said.

"It also means my coaching future won't be a distraction throughout our preparation and defence of the Origin shield.

"Given the year that the entire community has endured from droughts and bushfires to the COVID-19 pandemic, I can't think of a better way to end the year and lift com-munity spirits. I can't wait for Origin." Fittler has revolutionised NSW's approach to State of Origin since taking charge in 2018, providing a breath of fresh air for players.

In his two successful series, he has barred mobile phones in camp, had players train without shoes in earthing sessions and promoted walking to the ground for matches.

"Winning two from two series, the board could not be happier with the way things are going with Origin," NSW Rugby League CEO David Trodden said. "They were very pleased to extend Brad's contract when they met today. They have every confidence the run of success will continue this year."
---
WITH the NRL's highly anticipated return just three days away, ARL Commission chairman Peter V'landys has revealed his next huge mission: get paying members back at games from July 1, and sponsors even sooner.

The stunning V'landys revelation will be a massive shot in the arm for footy-starved fans.

While clubs have copped some backlash for asking members to keep up their -financial support through the COVID-19 shutdown, V'landys wants to reward those fans for their loyalty.

Asked if he had a specific date in mind for crowds to -return, V'landys said: "I am going to aim for July 1 to see what we can do.

"We want the sponsors in there as quickly as possible.

"You are allowed so many people so we will start looking at that with the biosecurity measures in the coming weeks. And I am not saying capacity crowds. I have to stress capped crowds.

"That is one way you can reward the members that have stuck firm." While V'landys has been questioned and even ridiculed for his determination to get the game back up and running, he said he always had a plan to open the game back up to the fans.

"There were a lot of things in my head when I went with the 20 rounds (schedule)," he said. "One was to make the competition credible. Two to go as late as possible into October so we can get a grand final with a crowd and then State of Origin with a crowd. That was always in my head.

"And, touch wood, and thank God so far, I have predicted accurately. "I said we'd be able to stay in Queensland. I said we'd stay in Victoria. I said we wouldn't need bubbles.

"So everything we have said has come to fruition. The last puzzle now is the crowds." Asked about how many members would be allowed to attend games, V'landys said: "It depends on the ground and how far you can distance them.

"In ANZ you might be able to get 20,000 with social distancing, whereas somewhere like Kogarah you might get 5000. I am only guessing these figures, but it is absolutely on the radar. That is the next challenge.

"But I want to reward the members of the clubs. As I have said many times, people who give me loyalty I give it back in spades. Those members who have stayed loyal, I will be rewarding." Under the revised draw, round eight starts on July 2 and the NRL already has -venues locked in until the end of round nine.

So the NRL will still have to work out how this can happen fairly given most clubs will have more members than potential available tickets.

For instance, at a club like South Sydney with 28,000-plus members they might initially have to take it in turns to attend the home games, or the NRL might split the fans from both clubs.

But V'landys has shown he will move mountains to make the seemingly impossible possible, as he did with getting the NRL back so early, so members have every reason to trust his intentions.

"I have to be careful to say they are capped (crowds) and with social distancing," V'landys said. "But once pubs and clubs are in full swing, there is no reason why we can't." 2020 NRL CLUB MEMBERSHIPS South Sydney: 28,413 Brisbane: 27,463 Parramatta: 27,104 Melbourne: 21,650 Canberra: 19,039 Penrith: 18,906 Newcastle: 18,139 Wests Tigers: 17,776 North Queensland: 16,709 Sydney Roosters: 15,189 Canterbury: 15,170 St George Illawarra: 15,035 Manly: 12,703 New Zealand: 12,673 Cronulla: 9768 Gold Coast: 7836
---
Aussie link to China military lab

CHINA'S People's Liberation Army has been involved in scientific research - co-funded by the Australian government - into the origins of the coronavirus.

In an explosive revelation, a study co-funded by the Australian Research Council and the Chinese government - and trumpeted by The University of Sydney as helping to unlock the genetic code of COVID-19 - relied on a laboratory in the People's Liberation Army's Academy of Military Medical Sciences to conduct its "genetic sequencing" and "virus isolation".

The director of this institute, Professor Wu-Chan Cao, who is thanked in the paper's acknowledgments for his "substantial contribution", has the rank of colonel and is also a Wuhan Institute of Virology board member - the same facility which is at the centre of a global probe into whether the naturally-occurring coronavirus was accidentally released from its laboratory or came from a local wet market. The study includes one of two scientific papers on the coronavirus undertaken by University of Sydney virologist and evolutionary biologist, Professor Edward Holmes.FULL REPORT PAGES 4-5
---
STATE of Origin will suffer a $5 million blow with the event's historic debut at Adelaide Oval this season destined for the scrapheap.

NRL innovation committee chairman Wayne Pearce says rugby league's inaugural Origin incursion into South Australia will almost certainly become a casualty of the coronavirus pandemic that has rocked world sport.

Despite Adelaide looking set to lose the 2020 series opener on June 3, Pearce is adamant Origin will be played this season. The South Australian government paid between $5 million and $8 million to snare Origin I, but a crowd lockout at Adelaide Oval to combat COVID-19 would rob the city of an estimated $15 million in tourism.

"The Adelaide game was heavily dependent on the South Australian government attracting tourist dollars for their economy," Pearce said. "But without a crowd I imagine it's not appealing for the -government."NSW would be favoured to receive two games this season because Queensland enjoyed a home-ground advantage at Suncorp Stadium in 2017.
---
Time to act on busted NRL bunker Once again the NRL bunker is broken and has caused another team to lose a match (Gould diggers, 27/7).

The fact that they don't seem to be able to get the "hard" decisions right is of concern to clubs, and more importantly fans, despite having a plethora of video and technical equipment and of course their supposed expertise.

NRL head of football Graham Annesley must be sick of making lame excuses for the poor performance of the bunker and perhaps appointing Phil Gould as a Mr Fix-it may prove a remedy.

However, perhaps Annesley should pass the bunker role to Fox Sport or Channel 9 commentators. They invariably get it right, certainly more times than the bunker does, and the savings would easily pay the way for Mr Gould.

Peter Cattlin, Freshwater "" " Having watched five NRL games last weekend, I am even more convinced that bunkers should only be on golf courses and even there they should be avoided!

Paul Wood, Nambucca Heads

Criminals haven't earned special COVID rights For the two women complaining about not being able to have face- to-face visits with their imprisoned husband and boyfriend and want the government to cut them some slack, ask yourselves did your partners cut the victims of their criminal behaviour any slack (WAGS say no contact rule is just criminal, 27/7).

No they didn't, so why should they be treated any different to how they acted. They are criminals and are where they belong.

No visitors should be allowed in prisons while this pandemic is going on. Be thankful you get to see them on video chat.

Some victims of crime never get to see their loved ones because that right was taken away from them by criminal acts.

So think yourselves fortunate you get to talk to your partners as others may not be so lucky due to no fault of their own.

Narelle, Sydney

This cop is certainly tops My "yea for the day" goes to Senior Sergeant Greg Donaldson (Caring cop's stand on seats, 27/7).

Going beyond the 'call of duty' in his initiative to install cars seats instead of issuing fines to struggling families is to be commended.

As an ex-copper's' wife (and grandmother), I would be happy to contribute $350 towards a family in need, to keep a child safe (and save a life).

Thank you Greg, for keeping the next generation safe through your dedicated work.

The saying "cops are tops", certainly rings true here.

Gloria Velleley, Belrose

Beware rising bully China has become the world's number one bully as it continues to do whatever it likes and threatens anyone who questions what they are doing (China's export threat, 27/7).

You only have to look at the countries around the world that have naively accepted money from them, not realising the influence the Chinese government now has over them.

You only have to look at the ports they have built in these countries. This, along with their occupation of islands in the South China Sea is part of their long-term plan to be a world superpower.

You only have to look at the military expansion by China. You don't continue expanding this capacity unless you have some plan to it.

As the rest of the world continues to deal with the pandemic, economies being brought to their knees, protest marches and surviving day to day, China seems to be doing whatever it likes. The trouble is, when we all wake up it will be too late.

Joe Kovac, Prestons

Scrapped tax a good start The NSW government is to be applauded for temporarily scrapping stamp duty for first-home buyers purchasing newly built properties up to $800,000. This is designed to spur virus recovery.

The subject of housing stamp duty has been under the spotlight ever since the introduction of the GST in 1999.

Economists and think tanks have universally chorused that the tax with its GST implications should be abolished and or replaced.

The change while welcome is temporary, narrowly focused and price-capped. NSW is in a deep hole with the COVID-19 virus pandemic. We need a bigger shovel. Peter Penglis, Kambah

Death march danger The stupidity of Black Lives Matter protest organisers knows no bounds (Protest and face jail time, 27/7).

Any protest would now be illegal and against dire warnings from the court, police and the NSW government about the great danger of spreading a killer virus.

But, apparently, they will still march. Such a move would defeat its purpose of saving lives.

With COVID-19 seemingly rampant throughout Sydney, they are putting everyone's lives in jeopardy - no matter whether the colour of your skin is black, brown or white - with their reckless attitude.

It would seem that any march would be more for pure spite and against all the best medical experts' advice.

Robert Livingstone, Alexandria

Free to act responsibly People value their freedom and many have fought and died to protect it (Protest and face jail time, 27/7).

They would be horrified that freedom could include the right to be stupid and endanger others.

You can hold whatever stupid belief you want but exercising your freedom should never put people's freedom and lives at risk.

Put your masks on, keep your mouths shut and hope that real science comes up with a solution.

Dennis Fitzgerald, Box Hill, Vic

Anarchy awaits defunding To those who would have their politicians defund the police (No to defunding police - Editorial, 27/7) I ask these questions.

Which would you rather see: a motorist speeding past your kids' school at 3pm cop a fine, or devil-may-care chaos?

A petty thief arrested, or allowed to escape?

A child molester getting his just deserts or ignored?

Law and order or anarchy?

Douglas Mackenzie, Deakin, ACT

Name game shame The owners of Coon cheese should enlighten themselves with the origins of the names of two of the state's central west townships in Coonamble and Coonabarabran (Aussie icon dumps brand name after BLM backlash, 25/7).

Both names are derived from Aboriginal languages. Anyone offended? The ignorance and stupidity of corporations making decisions like this is breathtaking.

Scott, Manly

Hanging out for Tim time If ever reincarnation could happen, please let me come back with the looks of George Clooney and the wealth of Bill Gates.

No, just joking, but please let me come back with the essay skills, penmanship and wit of Tim Blair (Get creative, whiners, 27/7).

I think all Telegraph columnists are exceptional, but how I look forward to Mondays so much to read another article written by Tim.

Alan Darley, Cronulla

Briefly ...

Why suspend stamp duty for only one year (A stamp of approval, 27/7)? This loathed tax should be scrapped permanently.

David Ingram, Randwick "" " One more great has left us, but don't worry Olivia, you have not gone with the wind. We will never forget you (Hollywood legend Olivia de Havilland dies, Online 27/7).

Peter Barr, Manly "" " Finally a good news story. Greg Donaldson is inspirational and to be admired (Caring cop's stand on seats, 27/7). Top cop, top guy.

Kathe Fraser, Bellevue Hill

HAVE YOUR SAYMAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
DRAMA A TEACHER 8.30PM, SUNDAY, FOX SHOWCASE WHEN Claire (Kate Mara, pictured) shoplifts lipstick from the supermarket, it hints that this high school teacher might be looking for some excitement in her life beyond correcting assignments. Enter: Eric (Nick Robinson), a handsome and popular teenage athlete in need of some extra tutoring

GENIUS: ARETHA 7.30PM, MONDAY, FOXTEL NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC IN this third instalment in the Genius anthology series, Cynthia Erivo (pictured) not only plays Aretha Franklin but performs her music as well. These first two episodes shed light on Aretha's tumultuous relationships with her preacher father and first husband.

STAGED 9.05PM, TUESDAY, ABC TV PLUS MICHAEL Palin guest stars as a curmudgeonly version of himself when this faux fly-on-the-wall series about actors Michael Sheen and David Tennant (both pictured) in lockdown returns. The pair hatch a plan over Zoom to remake their improvised comedy for an American audience. - Siobhan Duck

CRIME CI AUSTRALIA: MOST INFAMOUS 6.20PM, SUNDAY, FOXTEL CRIME + INVESTIGATION THIS episode dives into the tragic death of Dr Victor Chang (pictured), one of Australia's most gifted heart surgeons who was on the brink of pioneering the world's first artificial heart. In July 1991, Chang was shot twice in the head in a failed extortion attempt.

WORLD'S MOST EVIL KILLER 7.30PM, SUNDAY, FOXTEL CRIME + INVESTIGATION BACK-TO-BACK episodes tonight. Billy Dunlop (pictured) was already in jail when he bragged to a guard he'd killed his girlfriend Julie Hogg, as her family suspected, but the UK's double jeopardy laws meant he wouldn't be tried for the crime. He was wrong.

7NEWS PRESENTS: IVAN MILAT - BURIED SECRETS 7PM, SUNDAY, SEVEN HE'S thankfully been dead for a year, but the search for victims we do not know about continues - this special talks to criminologists and criminal psychologists who believe Milat's body count is higher than seven backpackers. - Cameron Adams

FOOD JAMIE'S ULTIMATE VEG 8.30PM, THURSDAY, SBS FOOD YOU know you've got to do it, so embrace the change and check out the cheeky chappy cook's solutions to injecting mealtimes with more vegetable goodness. Episode one starts with the easy options of cottage pie and mac 'n' cheese.

TASTE THE NATION WITH PADMA LAKSHMI 8.30PM, MONDAY, SBS FOOD THE American television personality and cookbook author hits the road to explore the influence of immigrants on American cuisine. Padma (pictured) checks in with a German family to explore the origins of the sporting culinary staple, the hot dog.

THE GREAT BRITISH BAKE OFF 8.30PM, TUESDAY, FOXTEL LIFESTYLE FOOD BAKE Off is going to get bonkers this season with comedian Matt Lucas (pictured) joining the team - cannot wait to see the flour fly between him and Noel Fielding. But of course the amateur bakers and their creations are the true stars of the show. - Kathy McCabe

LIFESTYLE CELEBRITY IOU 8.30PM, FRIDAY, FOXTEL TLC JUST when you thought Brad Pitt couldn't get any more swoon-worthy comes this home reno show. The Hollywood superstar reveals his sense of humour is as well-developed as his rippling muscles when he enlists Jonathan and Drew (both pictured) to makeover his make-up artist's house.

GRAND DESIGNS NEW ZEALAND 7.40PM, SUNDAY, ABC TV ARCHITECT Craig Jarvis (pictured) and his kids lived in a shed for years to realise his dreams of building a "living house" on the side of a sheer cliff face. What's a living house? Well, according to Craig, it's a home built with non-toxic, recycled materials that is completely sustainable and off-the-grid.

FLIP OR FLOP 9.30PM, FRIDAY, FOXTEL TLC IF you are looking for renovation inspiration then this is the show for you. Tarek and Christina (both pictured) are a couple who buy and renovate run-down properties to sell for profit. This week they transform a dilapidated five-bedroom house with a confusing layout. - Siobhan Duck

DOCO PILGRIMAGE: THE ROAD TO ROME 9.30PM, SUNDAY, ABC TV PLUS Eight UK celebs - you'll probably only recognise comedian Stephen K. Amos - of differing faiths strap on backpacks and have 15 days to tackle 1000km of the ancient Via Francigena pilgrimage, from the Italian Alps to Rome. In this first episode, the intrepid eight arrive in Martigny, Switzerland.

THE STORY OF THE SONGS 9.25PM, MONDAY, SBS This is a cool journey through the songs that made the biggest music stars who they are today. Tonight is Cher - we see how she went from a young girl reluctant in the recording studio to a chart-topping titan. Who knew Sonny Bono (pictured with Cher) wrote I Got You Babe after being inspired by Bob Dylan?

COVID DIARIES NYC 8.30PM, WEDNESDAY, FOX SHOWCASE This deeply personal film chronicles the lives of five young filmmakers who turned the cameras on themselves to tell the stories of their families during the first wave of COVID-19 in New York. It's heart-wrenching at times reliving those initial terrifying days. - Lisa Woolford

KIDS STILLWATER STREAMING, APPLETV+ ADAPTED from the Scholastic book series, Zen Shorts, this is the quiet TV your kids may need after a chaotic day at school. The story centres on siblings Karl, Addy and Michael, who face life's challenges with the help of their wise and completely huggable neighbour Stillwater. A gem of a show.

THE LOUD HOUSE 4.30PM, WEEKDAYS, FOXTEL NICKELODEON ON the flip side, look out for two weeks of brand new episodes of this boisterous cartoon. In "Cow Pie Kid", Lynn pushes Liam to his limits when he becomes the star pitcher for the middle school baseball team. Then, Lincoln's friends try to stop him from performing a magic act at the talent show.

TOTAL WIPEOUT 6.25PM, WEEKDAYS, 10 SHARE THINK Ninja over water and mud - this action series will be right up your kids' alley. Hosted by Top Gear's Richard Hammond (pictured), this UK series sees 20 contestants take on a purpose-built course, testing their agility and humility levels as they chase a place in the grand final at season's end. - Holly Byrnes
---
There's no edge going the sledge WHAT a riveting Test match. It's a pity the final day was marred by the appalling behaviour of Tim Paine in his exchange with Indian batsman Ravi Ashwin (Growling pains, 12/1). This on top of the behaviour of Steve Smith in remarking the batsman's mark in an attempt to throw him off his game.

Looks like the Australian cricket team are back to their old ways. This is how other countries perceive us as a nation through, among other things, the actions of our sporting teams. We are all judged by their actions. They should be reminded of that. It's time we showed some class.

John Lyden, Zetland

Just when it seemed that when Tim Paine replaced Steve Smith as captain after Sandpapergate he set about restoring our reputation and removing the 'ugly Australian' tag, his disgraceful behaviour in the Third Test has destroyed those efforts and returned to the idea that if you can't get the batsman out by legitimate means resort to sledging and abuse. How disappointing. I hope India stick it to them now.

Ted Ellis, Botany

So we now have a sledger as Australian cricket captain. Tim Paine went over accepted banter to Ravi Ashwin as India fought hard to draw the Sydney Test. Paine's dropped catches should be his main concern.

Geoff Hinds, Merrylands

McGowan bordering on a power trip Western Australian Premier Mark McGowan delivered a low blow to NSW for its handling of the COVID crisis in stating elimination was better than achieving no community transmission (WA joins in sick border brawl, 12/1).

The bigger issue now is that some Premiers are on an unprecedented power trip. They think they are experts in everything and anything.

It's a wonder Premier McGowan hasn't taken the Mexican wall approach and started building his own. State border closures have impacted families, trade and tourism. If the federal Government wasn't so accommodating in giving money to keep the economy going things would be completely different. After this is all over it will be interesting when Premiers get together to discuss things. You will be able to sense the tension and cut the air with a knife. It will take a long time to heal relations.

Joe Kovac, Prestons

Weak constitution Premier Mark McGowan (WA joins in sick border brawl, 12/1) and the other socialist state Premiers by their own actions demonstrate their total disregard to Section 92 of the Australian constitution.

But to criticise NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian, who has been the only one to act correctly throughout this whole episode is disgraceful. I'm also very disappointed with Prime Minister Morrison in not defending our Australian constitution.

Barry Stenner, Tweed Heads

Sad state of affairs I'm tired of having my constitutional freedom to travel restricted solely because I live in Sydney. Please withdraw NSW from receiving any overseas returnees; let the other States, especially Western Australia, be the quarantine cleaners for COVID-19.

WA citizens need to get a taste of what we have had to endure the past 12 months, particularly considering their bragging that they can do it better. Fair go, mate.

Peter G. White, West Ryde

Fly by nighter Mark McGowan, it's easy to say that NSW can't handle the COVID-19 problem. Well, as from today Western Australia can take all return travellers from overseas.

As it stands NSW is taking most of them. And yes, Annastacia Palaszczuk, Queensland should take your fair share, too.

Leo Christensen, Cranebrook

Switched on Origin Energy's plans for a $1 billion battery (Mega battery projects to spark green power, 12/1) doesn't mention that batteries store energy, but do not create it, and fails to say where the energy will come from.

Perhaps they are wise to site the battery in a coal field, so on windless nights they can burn some coal to charge the batteries. If they do, I recommend a High Efficiency, Low Emissions coal plant that can generate continuous power for 50 years, rather than the four hours claimed for their battery.

This would be funny if we were not all facing higher power costs from this crazy idea.

Doug Hurst, Chapman, ACT

Get to the point All you anti-vaxxer clowns hiding behind social media should adhere to Louise Roberts (Anti-vax going viral, 12/1). We are still fighting COVID and all they can do is squawk their diatribe against vaccination.

Erwin Vitnell, Bathurst

Testing times While I applaud the NSW Premier and her team for the job they are doing in dealing with the COVID situation, I can't help but be frustrated with what are seemingly contradictory statements being made regarding testing (Race to solve mystery source, 12/1).

On the one hand we are told that there is no attempt to eradicate the virus because that is not possible. Instead, we are told that the aim is for zero community transmission which makes sense. On the other hand, every day someone says the testing numbers need to be higher.

Now if, as stated, the aim is to eradicate community transmission then presumably people won't have symptoms because they haven't caught the virus. If they don't have symptoms or haven't been in close contact with someone who has tested positive then presumably they don't need testing so the numbers are what they are.

So is the case that what the government wants is as many people as possible to get tested regardless of whether they have symptoms or not or do they only want those with symptoms or who have been in close contact with someone who has tested positive to get tested? If the former, then they should say so, instead of every day stating the requirement for testing is "even if you have the mildest of symptoms". I find it very confusing.

Brent Hedges, Manly

Profits all atwitter All sides of politics should be opposing the censorship of the US President (MPs not so tweet on censoring Trump, 12/1).

Twitter allowed Trump's 88.7 million followers to directly communicate with him, including those wishing to be critical. In practice, Twitter's relationship with Trump was one of interdependence.  Bypassing the "fake" media was otherwise impossible. Millions of followers are great advertising revenue. Rusticating their (orange) goose laying golden eggs will be costly. Yesterday, Twitter reported a first quarter $8.4 million loss compared to last year's $191 million profit. With $3.43 billion debt, Twitter itself may be following Trump out the door. Epitaph writers might ponder the cost.

Alan Sexton, North Parramatta

Briefly ...

When WHO inspectors finally get into Wuhan to trace the origin of COVID-19 all they'll find will be traces of fresh paint.

Tom, Drummoyne

* * * Banning Donald Trump from any social media platform means nothing - he will start his own. It will be short on punctuation, grammar and probably the truth, but that will make it interesting. I look forward to signing on.

Herbert Montaine, Tugun, Qld

* * * The new Lamb Council advert is brilliant but I have no doubt President Palaszczuk will make a complaint to the Advertising Standards Board.

John Stuart, St Fillans

* * * Australian skipper Tim Paine's decision to bat first in Melbourne and his poor keeping has badly affected Australia's chances of winning the series against India. The three dropped catches on day five in Sydney were not very difficult and let India off the hook. A good leader but now in his twilight.

John Donohoe, Epping

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
SIMPLY Your Best.

The pressure has been applied to a fragile Queensland now that the bookies and NSW coach Brad Fittler have declared the Maroons will need one of their greatest performances to overcome the Blues.

"I get the impression that Queensland will need to be at their best (to beat us)," Fittler said. "I feel like our blokes, they're ready, they're strong." The city of Adelaide will host State of Origin for the first time on Wednesday night -before a COVID-19-restricted crowd of 26,500 that is set to -attend Adelaide Oval.

And on a night of records, including the first Origin match to be played in November, -Fittler's belief in his Blues to take a 1-0 series lead is backed up by the revelation NSW will start the shortest price to win an Origin in TAB -history.

The Blues' $1.33 head-to-head price to beat the Maroons is the shortest for an Origin game since TAB offered sports betting in 1998.

The Maroons, who have injury concerns over centre -Brenko Lee and utility Kurt Capewell, are friendless at $3.30.

The Blues are also a record-low $1.25 to win the series, while the Cane Toads of veteran coach Wayne Bennett have been installed at $4.

An unlikely win for the Maroons, who will be without a host of stars due to injury and suspension - including Michael Morgan, Valentine Holmes, Kalyn Ponga and Kyle Feldt - as well as Josh McGuire (overlooked), would be one of Origin's greatest upsets.

The Maroons will have at least seven players on debut, their most since game one in 2006. The Blues will have three CONTINUED PAGE 72 FROM BACK PAGE debutants, including right centre Clint Gutherson, five-eighth Luke Keary and front-rower Junior Paulo.

Fittler was certain that given his major influence on the team, Keary was ready to steer the Blues, who will combine with Nathan Cleary for the first time in Origin.

"Luke Keary has obviously been with the Roosters and they have had some big games over the last couple of years," Fittler said. "He's a courageous player. He backs himself. That's the courage you like as a coach." Shield holders the Blues are attempting to win their third consecutive series for just the second time in 40 years of Origin football.

Fittler is aiming to become just the second NSW coach to claim the treble behind Phil Gould, who did so from 1992-94.

The NSW coach understands that nothing is certain when it comes to winning Origin matches and he respects -Bennett's ability to have the Maroons ready for a boilover.

"All I know is they will be ready," -Fittler said.

"When I look at their team I just assume every player is going to have their best game.

"I feel like they will play as a team and will be spirited.

"That's all we can bank on and that's all we can prepare for." Given the strain of the past season and Origin's placement in November, Fittler answered matter-of-factly when asked if his players could struggle to find their rhythm from the kick-off.

"I don't get that impression," he said. The Blues' hit-and-run mission includes flying via charter plane to Adelaide on Wednesday morning before returning to Sydney after the match.
---
Australia is on the back foot in the South Pacific, where China is using aid to win friends and influence our neighbours, writes Charles Miranda

News of the teleconference sent shockwaves through the halls of the headquarters of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade .

China had up on the screen senior health officials from 10 Pacific nations to discuss how the Asian giant was going to help them overcome the coronavirus crisis.

If the capacity of China to speed dial these figures at short notice on March 10 was a surprise to those in DFAT's RG Casey Building then so too was what followed.

A seven-person medical team with more than eight tonnes of kit arrived in Cambodia within days.

In Vanuatu a giant novelty-cheque was delivered to that nation's foreign minister, US$100,000 made out to the government of Vanuatu.

"Good friends feel close even when they are thousands of miles apart," Chinese Ambassador to the South Pacific republic Zhou Haicheng said before gushing how China appreciated the "valuable support" the tiny island had provided in return to China.

That support was simply by pledging allegiance.

Zoom diplomacy Similar teleconferences were held within the week by China's health officials with other nations, including a Zoom with Eastern European nations, Japan and South Korea. Even Costa Rica and French Polynesia got a one-on-one.

Goods have followed by air and sea. Fiji got 47 military vehicles to combat the virus; Australia's Defence Department had no idea.

"That they did that was not a surprise but how quickly they did it was and caught a few people off guard," one senior Australian foreign office diplomat told News Corp Australia of China's regional outreach.

"We were all still dealing with the fallout of the pandemic, Australia and Australians, but they were already out with gifts in hand and that has taught us a few things." One of those lessons was how out of step Prime Minister Scott Morrison's multi-billion Pacific Step-up program has been when at the first sign of a global crisis, all focus and attention was to domestic issues; a correct attitude perhaps for the first few weeks but months on and the obsession remains on how many hospital beds, bad boats and misbehaving backpackers we have.

If this is to be the Battle of the Pacific we had to have, then we have lost the first round.

The shame is that foreign aid in this country is still seen as some Big Brother moral obligation when it needs to be seen as a strategic imperative. Given the crisis in America and its foreign policy shift to be more insular and nationalist a question marks hangs on its capacity to maintain an active role in the region.

While regionally nations are still grappling with the domestic handling of the COVID-19 crisis and who - or WHO (World Health Organisation) - is to blame, China has been offering in its own way solutions to nations around the globe.

From China, here to help In the Pacific, China has trumpeted to Asian neighbours that at a crisis it is outwardly looking and there to help. To rub it in, it has also been flagging privately to Pacific nations that the even the once mighty United States has not been around with its aircraft carrier USS Theodore Roosevelt even forced to flee to cope with coronavirus outbreak of more than 600 crew. In total more than 150 US military bases have suffered COVID-19 cases including at all but one of its nuclear facilities. Some of the hardest hit are US assets in Japan where the US military has declared a public health emergency at its air and sea bases.

For Australia, desperate to shore up Pacific friends in good times and bad, what corona has done has highlighted when it comes to manufacturing China is the world's leader and can reach out anywhere, anytime to anyone needing it, Australia cannot compete.

And while the federal government is at pains to claim there is no competition in the Pacific between it and China, it's telling that days after China pledged ventilators for the Solomon Islands, Australia found a couple of spares and also pledged them for that country. Similar followed for Tonga and PNG.

Strings attached Professor Rory Medcalf, head of the ANU National Security College, has had three decades experience in intelligence, diplomacy and academia and said while China's charm offensive is outwardly appreciated - no less than by the US where the White House readily heaped praise in exchange for received consignments of medical goods from their sometime trade rival - it has raised red flag concerns for a region at a cross roads of alliance realignment.

But he said it is too early to say what COVID-19 will do for allegiances in the Pacific.

"There is a paradox in that China appears to have performed strongly in limiting the spread internally after the outrageous initial cover-up and now is trying to project being a good citizen internationally," Prof Medcalf said yesterday.

"But I think that a lot of the response from the region and the rest of the world is extremely more wary below the surface than it is on the surface. I think there is now a long-term quite profound resentment and wariness about China that this crisis has engendered even if China is delivering some kind of assistance in the short term." In the past fortnight it has renewed pressure on Taiwan, launched a propaganda war with the United States, France and even bizarrely Kazakhstan which it said would soon return as a state of China. It is feuding with Thailand over social media harassment of a Thai public figure, has put much of Africa off-side by alleged treatment of African-origin people in their country, notably Nigerians living in Guangzhou, and even chased, rammed and sank a Vietnamese fishing boat before rescuing the hapless fishermen in South China Sea waters.

It is also sending spy planes and survey vessels into territories of Vietnam and the Philippines and is clashing with Indonesia. Then of course there are its questionable low COVID-19 death and sick tolls and the poor quality medical masks and gowns, likened to having the resilience of a piece of tissue.

But the growing distrust of the apparent gift giving of Trojan horses by China could play into Australia's hands with Professor Medcalf believing the federal government has not taken any missteps yet in the crisis but could now look to seize the moment. And in a limited way it has already begun that through weekly dialogues with the US, India and Japan now including nations like Vietnam and South Korea.

"There is an opportunity for Australia not only to exert influence but to try and build coalitions of co-operation in the region … this is really quite a unique convergence of geopolitical competition and a transnational shock … so the next 12 to 18 months will be quite a transformational moment in regional and global stability and a whole lot of things can go wrong."

Playing catch-up Last week Australia did provide aid to Vanuatu, albeit for the Category 5 Cyclone Harold superstorm that has left tens of thousands of people homeless in Vanuatu alone, let alone the havoc and death it has wreaked in Fiji, Tonga and the Solomon Islands.

Foreign Minister Marise Payne said Australia has "strongly engaged" with Pacific partners and was now assisting with health expertise and other advice for public information campaigns via regional institutions including WHO.

She said the Australian government had moved quickly to "reorient our development partnerships" to bring forward already pledged health services funding.

Prior to the cyclone it was UNICEF and its partners that provided 170,000 essential medical packs including respirators, masks, gowns and corona-testing kits but has not the capacity to do more.

"Our small size and limited resources makes us extremely vulnerable during an emergency crisis like this," UNICEF Pacific Communications Officer Zubnah Khan blogged.

That help has to come from countries like Australia and New Zealand. Strategically, Australia has moved to better engage neighbours, reopening a mothballed naval base in PNG and offering to refurbish facilities in Fiji and the Solomons but COVID-19 has highlighted one significant shortfall - Australia's manufacturing base is reliant on China for so many goods, it has to act as a middle man to source them from China for the Pacific when China can dispatch to the Pacific direct.

Remaining focused Pacific Island nations can often be seen to think short term and readily accept Chinese pledges of cash and goods for infrastructure but the long-term payback is less considered.

Despite this Australia remains the biggest aid donor to the region, a move it is hoped can continue to guarantee open waterways and access to offshore facilities; areas China has a strong desire to achieve.

Mr Morrison late last month told G20 partners said there was never a more important time than to help the Pacific but curiously just when that help will come is unclear.

Ms Payne said yesterday COVID-19 was a significant global crisis with ramifications for the Pacific.

"We recognise that this is an impact on the world which will have significant flow-on effects to international relationships, to our stability and security in our own region," she said.

"So we're focused on supporting our friends in the Pacific, friends in South East Asia, Indonesia in particular, Timor-Leste, Papua New Guinea, making sure that when we are able to provide support Australia is delivering that."And then of course looking beyond, how we do move beyond the coronavirus experience and how we do re-engage and make sure that the things that are important to us as Australians, our values, the rule of law, the human rights that we focus on are still a core part of how we do business."
---
Bat-tle for our sense of humour May I suggest that those who complained about the Boating Camping Fishing ad depicting someone eating a bat sandwich grow a funny bone and stop shoving your unfunny ideals down the throat of the majority of the population, who still have a sense of humour (Sanga scene driving 'em batty, 4/1).

Glenn O'Sullivan, Kanwal "" " Honestly, since when did Australians lose their sense of humour? Why are people complaining about the Boating Camping Fishing ads (Sanga scene driving 'em batty, 4/1)?

They are one of the most amusing ads around, and much better than those awful and repetitive ads for life insurance, funerals and instant finance.

Margaret Wright, Pendle Hill, "" " An advertisement for the Boating, Camping and Fishing stores is attracting complaints from people upset over an ad that shows someone eating a bat sandwich, which is a sly reference to COVID's supposed origins.

The Advertising Standards Bureau is taking the complaints seriously and has launched an investigation.

I am always up for a bit of larrikin humour, it's the Australian way, but after viewing the ad, it left a very bad taste in my mouth.

Peter Penglis, Kambah, ACT

Maintain pressure on China over their virus It's pleasing to read there is at least one influential person not letting up on China's responsibility for the coronavirus (American official revives lab theory; 4/1).

I was beginning to think world leaders had conveniently swept this matter under the politically correct carpet for fear of antagonising China.

In fact I'm still not sure if that's not the case, given the WHO investigation is looking more and more by the day to be a non-event/ whitewash.

There is no denying this catastrophic event originated in China. Whether it was man-made might be open to conjecture but there is no doubt China has to be held accountable, regardless of the precise circumstances. Why then are world leaders so quiet … scared, perhaps?

At least Prime Minister Scott Morrison has had the intestinal fortitude to insist on an investigation.

The problem is it will be a Clayton's model. This isn't good enough; we must not lay down on this.

John George, Terrigal

Our heroes saving Fiji A great story in The Daily Telegraph about the Australian government and the ADF helping out Fiji after it was battered by a cyclone that saw the place flattened (Australia delivers aid to neighbour in need, 4/1).

The ADF is helping with the rebuilding of schools, supplying water and replenishing food.

What a great country we are - always ready to step in when needed. Barry, Hallidays Point

Many unhappy returns Various state premiers are closing their borders in an effort to protect their citizens from COVID-19 (Border closures see Victorians locked out, 4/1).

Might I respectfully suggest that the commonwealth does the same and closes our international borders to protect Australians from this very contagious disease.

Most of the people returning to Australia now would probably have resided overseas for a number of years, and are using the dual passport system to gain entry to a relatively stable virus environment.

We have done the hard yards over 12 months now to try and combat this disease and to be placed in peril because of the returning "expats" doesn't sit well with a lot of people.

Janice Russell, Malua Bay

Voice of '60s crosses over A voice from one of Liverpool's (England) greatest has fallen, Gerry Marsden (Singer Gerry Marsden dies aged 78 - Online, 4/1).

Gerry's style of writing and singing was heartfelt, melodic but catchy, with a voice that was, somehow, never going to be anything other than true to its roots.

With his band the Pacemakers he helped make the '60s so memorable, and gave us songs that will be eternal, I am sure.

Never a boastful or a brash person just an all-round great guy. As a singer myself for all of those years, I was indeed privileged to have sung and recorded some of his songs with Don't Let The Sun Catch You Crying being a favourite.

Gerry Marsden, we salute you, and Liverpool will miss a true and loved son. Dave Burt, Kingswood

Keeping the arts in tune I am looking forward to attending my first opera production at the Sydney Opera House this month.

While many I know have seen performances by overseas artists and children's shows with grandchildren, now is the time we all should support our Australian performers in the arts.

Hard to believe that the early version of The Merry Widow was initially unsuccessful (Merry Widow's magic was inspired by a flop, History, 4/1).

La Traviata (outdoors) is my Christmas gift to myself and this time not in the "cheap" seats (COVID restrictions permitted).

Gloria Velleley, Belrose

Fuel for thought There is an old saying a picture paints a thousand words. Monday's picture of the gas-guzzling, carbon dioxide-producing Land Cruiser definitely gave Jane Caro the stranded feeling (Gas-guzzler lands climate crusader in muddy spot, 4/1).

Ms Caro, should remember the words, do as I say.

Her comments that they needed such a vehicle to get to her farm makes me think "pigs might fly".

A vehicle such as a Suzuki Jimny, a small, fuel-sipping four-wheel-drive could easily get there and probably not get stuck.

It's amazing noisy advocates for climate change don't practise what they preach. Joe Kovac, Prestons

Masking of retail issue Regardless of your opinion on the mandatory wearing of masks, it seemed very odd to me that the Premier suggested masks would lead to an increase in economic activity, when clearly this will not be the case ($200 mask fines, 3/1).

My local shopping centre on Monday morning was as quiet as a Sunday. Odder still is that I must wear a mask when quickly dashing in to get my morning coffee yet can stand around for hours with nearly 100 strangers in a pub or club, in a much more confined area, without a mask.

Restrictions must be logical and consistent if you want support from the community. I had previously thought NSW had the right balance. Now I'm a lot less sure.

Mitchell Beston, Woy Woy

Briefly … Thanks Tim Blair for your very funny piece in Monday's Tele (The year that will be - Opinion, 4/1). I haven't laughed so much for a long time. Please keep up your humour. We Coasties need all the laughter we can get at the moment.

Bob Fitzpatrick, Bateau Bay "" " Surely to goodness we should not have to put up with any waffle from Greta Thunberg this early in the year (Greenie celebs can globe trot: Greta, 4/7). This poor girl should be pitied for her ignorance.

Erwin Vitnell, Bathurst

"" " While smartphones give ready connections to photos, videos, online chat etc it is obvious that they are never smart or adequate enough to replace the real physical need to connect with family or friends (New rise of phone phobia, 4/1) Steve Ngeow, Chatswood "" " Way to go Mikey Wright, what a legend with that launch into the surf in Hawaii to rescue a stricken swimmer, truly epic (The Wright stuff, 2/1). Try that with a man-bun, hipsters. Only mullet power can claim that type of gnarly action.

Robert Brown, Davistown

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
If you liked… THE THICK OF IT Try… FLACK STREAMING, FOXTEL NOW 7.30PM, MONDAY, FOX ONE THE final episode of season two of this brilliantly wicked drama drops this week, and I'll be sorry to see it go. Fans of this series, who found the heady mix of celebrity scandal and deeply dysfunctional people paid to cover for them intoxicating, will have to wait to see if this is going to a season three (possibly on Amazon Prime, which picked Flack up after Viacom incomprehensively dropped it a week before season two started). Besides the strong performance by lead Anna Paquin, the highlight so far this season has been the addition of Sam Neill, who found a match on screen with Sophie Okonedo as Paquin's boss, Caroline. His character, Duncan, was suitably shocking, boasting he'd "once snorted a gram of cocaine off Kylie Minogue's bottom and then rode a Shetland pony into a swimming pool". It's a scene Neill thought would end up on the cutting room floor, telling one UK paper: "Kylie's a friend of mine, and I thought she wouldn't mind, but perhaps she'll take terrible exception to it. Still, she does have a famously good bottom. I was worried they'd cut it out." - Holly Byrnes

DRAMA THE SINNER: JAMIE STREAMING, NETFLIX DETECTIVE Harry Ambrose (Bill Pullman, pictured) returns for season three of this brilliant crime anthology, which sets him a whole new mystery to solve. The new episodes star Matt Bomer as Jamie Burns, an expectant father and Dorchester resident who seeks Harry's support after a fatal car accident in Upstate New York reveals a much larger and more disturbing case behind it. Bomer is bone-chillingly good. - HB

KIDS ODD SQUAD 4.30PM, SUNDAY, ABC ME IF, like me, you are mathematically challenged, it might be an idea to make a date to watch this clever live action series, which sees a crack squad of spies investigate strange happenings in their town. The child actors use mathematical concepts (addition, multiplication, using data in graphs, etc.) to advance each episode's plot; but it also parodies the police procedural. Smart and educational. - HB

FACTUAL BACK ROADS 8PM, MONDAY, ABCABC News Breakfast co-host Lisa Millar, the happy force behind the show's rejuvenated ratings, turns her beaming smile on country Australia and presenting this week's episode of Back Roads. This week we -find ourselves in Rokewood, a tiny town in rural Victoria. Millar (pictured) takes a look at how a community comes together when the heart of the town is unable to beat. A COVID-19 special that will warm your heart. - HB

If you liked… THE AMERICANS Try… PERRY MASON STREAMING, FOXTEL NOW 11AM AND 8.30PM, MONDAY, FOX SHOWCASE BRACE for a grim start to this dark and moody remake of the 1950s classic legal drama, reimagined with The Americans star Matthew Rhys in the role played famously by Raymond Burr. I can't say too much as HBO are keeping the plot twists under wraps, only adding to the suspense of this series; but the light and shade in the first episode was clever and kept tight. Set in 1932 Los Angeles, the series will focus on the origin story of famed defence lawyer Perry Mason, based on characters from Erle Stanley Gardner's novels. Living pay-cheque-to-pay-cheque as a low-rent private investigator, Mason is haunted by his wartime experiences in France and is suffering the effects of a broken marriage. LA is booming while the rest of the country struggles through the Great Depression - but a kidnapping gone very wrong leads to Mason exposing a fractured city as he uncovers the truth of the crime. Rhys doesn't carry the intensity of Burr's performance, but folding under the brim of his fedora hat, he certainly looks the part. - Holly Byrnes

COMEDY WHAT WE DO IN THE SHADOWS STREAMING, FOXTEL NOW 8.30PM, THURSDAY, FOX SHOWCASE SEASON two of this hilarious show returns this week (with a third confirmed for 2021). Our vampire housemates Nandor (Kayvan Novak, pictured), Nadja (Natasia Demetriou), Laszlo (Matt Berry) and "energy vampire" Colin Robinson (Mark Proksch) all return to document their nightly exploits as they navigate the modern world of Staten Island. Based on the feature film of the same name by JoJo Rabbit's Taika Waititi and Flight of the Conchords' Jermaine Clement. - HB

FACTUAL WHO DO YOU THINK YOU ARE?

7.30PM, TUESDAY, SBS WE fell deeply in love with her crazy character in O-ffspring and more recently as the equally dysfunctional lawyer in 10's returning drama Five Bedrooms. But what will we find in her family's closet as Kat Stewart (pictured) goes searching for geneaologicial secrets? Her stable and loving upbringing instilled in her a strong sense of ethics and it's with this belief that she goes on her ancestral journey, seeking characters who were both principled and just a little bit colourful. - HB

REALITY BOTCHED STREAMING, FOXTEL NOW 7.30PM, TUESDAY, FOXTEL E! I CAN'T be the only one who's taken a deeper interest in this series since the rise of the Zoom meeting, where every wrinkle and double chin seems to be magnified on screen, tenfold. The good news is there are new episodes to binge from Tuesday. Dr Terry Dubrow and Dr Paul Nassif (both pictured) should brace for a rush of new patients, all desperate for a WFH (work from home) nip and tuck. - HB
---
Morrison, more than any previous leader, understands Beijing's aim to dominate us There's no question Scott Morrison is leading the toughest strategic and policy approach towards China of any government in Australia's recent history.

Morrison's approach puts sovereignty and national security ahead of economic prosperity.

This forms the single biggest policy difference between the Turnbull and Morrison governments.

It's fair to say successive Australian governments, both Labor and the Coalition, vastly underestimated the threat a rising China could pose, a threat that increased markedly since Xi Jinping assumed the presidency in 2013.

Behind the scenes, Morrison, like Tony Abbott before him, is clear-eyed about China's ultimate intention - which is, to put it bluntly, to control the world, including Australia.

This perception of China's end goal underpins the Morrison government's foreign policy approach.

He moved swiftly this week to suspend Australia's extradition treaty with Hong Kong in the wake of China's national security law that upended the joint declaration between the UK and China over the future of Hong Kong.

Morrison was one of the first in the world to do so, along with prioritising visas for Hong Kong citizens.

Just as Morrison tore up the extradition treaty with Hong Kong, with no fuss or fanfare, it is extraordinary to reflect on the passion with which former Foreign Minister Julie Bishop pursued ratification of Australia's extradition treaty with China just three years ago.

The Howard government had negotiated the extradition treaty in an era when China was far less assertive and aggressive, but never ratified it.

Neither did Kevin Rudd, Julia Gillard or Tony Abbott, all deeply concerned about China's legal system and human rights abuses, among a myriad other powerful issues.

Official advice from the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet warned Abbott when he was Prime Minister against ratifying Australia's extradition treaty with China in a briefing note dated December 19, 2014.

He had no enthusiasm for signing it, alert to the problems of China's criminal justice system.

Inexplicably, Turnbull decided to ratify it.

DFAT's advice supported this move - indicating major problems within the public service - and there was pressure from Beijing to make it happen.

"Julie Bishop, reflecting DFAT's advice, supported ratification, as did the Attorney-General's Department," Turnbull writes in his book.

"Although it never came up at leaders' discussions, we had every reason to believe that a failure to ratify the extradition treaty would make it harder for us to ensure that China did not impose the death penalty on Australian citizens convicted of capital offences." Ruminating on how hard the Turnbull government fought to pursue a working extradition treaty with China demonstrates the stunning change in Australia's foreign policy approach in just three years.

Turnbull had long rejected the framing of China as the modern equivalent of the Soviet Union, arguing it was not "an enduring threat to the United States and its allies, and one which therefore must be contained." His attitude was influenced by China's position as our largest trading partner "in large measure responsible for our current and prospective prosperity." While Turnbull refused to sign-up to the Belt and Road initiative, he told Premier Li Keqiang Australia would be "delighted to work on specific projects." Under Turnbull's government, Chinese leadership was repeatedly assured the extradition treaty would be ratified, including in a November 2015 meeting with President Xi Jinping.

Turnbull's history paints Bishop as the driving force behind the move, but this interpretation of events is disputed.

Turnbull is understood to have phoned several MPs around 7 o'clock one morning when it was clear the ratification would not get through the Senate because of a backbench revolt led by Andrew Hastie, Tim Wilson and James Paterson.

The only one to answer his phone, perhaps not realising he was going to be on the end of a prime ministerial tirade, was Paterson.

Turnbull made it clear to the senator he was very upset with him and did not appreciate his threats to cross the floor over the issue.

Paterson had made the bombshell threat during a private briefing session with Julie Bishop and Michael Keenan, after the pair had outlined their case for why ratification should go ahead.

"It got quite terse," one MP present said.

"Julie was affronted that people were so strong and vehement in their opposition.

"But most of us couldn't even believe the situation was occurring. Why are we even having this conversation?" Another MP present said Paterson's threat to cross the floor "blew her mind." There's no doubt in the three years since these dramatic events unfolded on the international stage public sentiment has shifted.

"The whole government has woken up to this. It's impossible to ignore," one MP said of China's rising aggression and bullying tactics, which have included economic sanctions in response to Australia's routine call for an inquiry into the origins of COVID-19.

Former Foreign Minister Alexander Downer rejected suggestions the Howard government underestimated China's threat, telling me "past governments weren't dealing with the China of 2020." "This is a much more aggressive government of China than (the one) we had to deal with when I was the Foreign Minister," he said.

"That Xi Jinping has become the President of China, his government has engaged in what they like to call 'wolf warrior diplomacy', ambassadors have been exceptionally rude about their host governments, they've started using economic levers to try to threaten other countries, including us. Punishment is meted out left, right and centre and you've seen what happened in Hong Kong." As Foreign Minister, Marise Payne has already earned the respect of her colleagues. Criticism of her infrequent media appearances has given way to praise for the substance she brings to the role.

There's confidence in her ability to do the job as the threat China poses escalates.

Aside from the "grey space between peace and war" - the economic coercion, the interference in politics and business and cyber warfare - the vulnerability of Australia's situation is even more grave than this.

The Defence Strategic Update, released a week ago, warned of the rising military threat in the Indo-Pacific, stating Australia "must be better prepared for the prospect of high-intensity conflict." Morrison's comments comparing the world now to 1930s and 40s Europe demonstrates the seriousness with which he heeds this advice.
---
PRIME Minister Scott Morrison insists Australia should back an inquiry into the origin of the COVID-19 -outbreak as US President Donald Trump suggests China unleashed the virus as a "mistake".

Mr Morrison said his government would speak in favour of a European Union resolution to set up an independent investigation into the outbreak. The resolution will be put to the World Health Assembly meeting in Geneva later this month.

Asked what he thought of a -suggestion the virus could have emerged from a Chinese laboratory, Mr Morrison said he had seen no -evidence to suggest that had been the likely source.

"The reports (about the Wuhan lab) … they were public, they were being reported at the time, so of course the government was aware of those suggestions," he said.

"There hasn't been anything subsequent that would have borne out those initial reports as far as our -government is concerned." The PM said the "most likely -scenario that has been canvassed relates to wildlife wet markets".

"This is one of the reasons why it is important we have an objective, -independent assessment of how this originated and learn the lessons of how this occurred," he said.

Mr Morrison said the investigation being recommended to the global assembly was an entirely sensible -suggestion and would help countries respond more quickly to future outbreaks.

However, Mr Trump speculated that China could have unleashed the coronavirus on the world due to a horrible "mistake", and his intelligence agencies said they were still examining the idea - put forward by the president and aides - that the pandemic may have resulted from an accident at a Chinese laboratory.

The Office of the Director of National Intelligence, the clearing house for the web of US spy agencies, said it had ruled out the virus being man-made but was still investigating the precise source of the global pandemic, which has killed more than 220,000 people worldwide.

Mr Trump suggested he had seen evidence to support the theory that the origin was an infectious disease lab in Wuhan, the epicentre of the Chinese outbreak, and said the US was now "finding how it came out".

"It's a terrible thing," he said. "Whether they made a mistake or whether it started off as a mistake and then they made another one, or did somebody do something on purpose." The US Intelligence Community (IC) statement said the federal -agencies concurred "with the wide scientific consensus that the COVID-19 virus was not man-made or genetically modified".

"The IC will continue to rigorously examine emerging information and intelligence to determine whether the outbreak began through contact with infected animals or if it was the result of an accident at -a laboratory in Wuhan," the statement said.

Earlier yesterday, Mr Morrison said Australia was working "every day" on its relationship with China.

Chinese ambassador to Australia Cheng Jingye has floated the idea of a consumer boycott of Australian -products in retaliation if Canberra supports the investigation into the outbreak.Liberal MP Trent Zimmerman said Chinese diplomats had been "downright despicable and menacing" since Australia started pressing the case for a review.
---
DONALD Trump could reveal critical intelligence linking the COVID-19 pandemic to a secret lab in Wuhan in his final days as US president.

The Sun reports the outgoing president could play one final hand in the international investigation of the virus' origins, with Mr Trump reportedly looking to declassify evidence gathered by US operatives revealing the lab as the pandemic's origin point. It's believed Mr Trump may also release information from US intelligence operatives revealing alleged links between Wuhan scientists and the Chinese Army. A well placed diplomatic source told The Sun: "The US have stopped short of this so far but anything could happen in the coming days." A UK government source added there has been "increasing chatter" that Mr Trump and his top diplomat Mike Pompeo were planning a broadside against the Chinese Communist Party over their handling of the outbreak.
---
FOOTY is back!

So too is the KFC SuperCoach - and haven't we got some storylines and team selections to sift through for our all important cheapies.

Because aside from the pre-round one Cheapie Bible, the trades you make this week could well be the most important you make all season.

Cheapies are the single most important key to SuperCoach success. Without them, you can't afford the Cooks, Taumalolos and Tedescos of the world, and picking the wrong cheapies can ruin your entire season.

A cheapie, by definition, is any player under $280,000. As the season goes along we will give a running verdict on when to sell, sit, buy or hold every cheapie who hits our radar.

Here we go!

Jarome Luai Panthers HFB|5/8 ($257,400) Avg: 46PPG. Rd 2: 35 points Many doubted Luai, but he is one of the best in the sub-$300k price bracket in any position, and the No.6 jersey is his. Luai could even take over the goalkicking in the absence of Nathan Cleary in the next few weeks. And his running game is where the points will come. Hopefully things land right for him, and we see Luai jet in price to the $450k-$500k range in no time.

Verdict: BUY - The Panthers started on fire, and we can expect Luai to get better.

Toby Rudolf Sharks FRF ($171,900) Avg: 39.5PPG. Rd 2: 50 points Rudolf's first two games were very promising, particularly his second, when he kept Andrew Fifita and Jack Williams on the bench for large chunks of the game and scored 50 points in base stats in 42 minutes. With the forward rotation unaffected by injuries or suspensions, the spot is Rudolf's and hopefully the minutes (and role) continue to evolve.

Verdict: BUY - Rudolf is exciting. I had him atop the cheapie FRF trio (JTB, Musgrove, Rudolf) pecking order to start the season, and that is even stronger right now.

Jamayne Taunua-Brown Warriors FRF ($171,900) Avg: 41PPG. Rd 2: 46 points This kid is exciting. He has a high work rate and ball-playing skills of a halfback. In his first two games he returned 36 and 46 points respectively at a tick over 1.0PPM. And impressively - 39 minutes. The offloads, tackles busts and other attacking stats will come. We figured the Warriors would have Jazz Tevaga back but he's injured and Ah Mau is out, so JTB starts at prop. Hallelujah.

Verdict: BUY - I'm a huge fan. But beware the potential arrivals of Murchie and loan middle forwards.

Blayke Brailey Sharks HOK ($201,000) Avg: 42PPG. Rd 2: 46 points Surprisingly, many are selling Damien Cook to purchase Api Koroisau. Is that a risky ploy with Brailey as your only back-up in the event of injury? I would normally say yes, but given Brailey played the full 80 minutes in both matches this season for scores of 38 and 46 points respectively, and Harry Grant will likely be there at $180k for us in two weeks as a downgrade, I'm all for it. Brailey is one of the few players not affected by the hiatus. It's his spot, without question, and he is a lock for the safest cash injection of the season.

Verdict: BUY - You can't play Brailey in your best 17, but he should earn in the vicinity of $100k-$150k in a slow burn, or around $80k down to Grant in a few weeks.

Eliesa Katoa Warriors 2RF ($171,900) Avg: 50.5PPG. Rd 2: 50 points What a start for the young backrower, with 51 points in 52 minutes and 50 points in 65 minutes in his two games. Causing havoc with his footwork at the line, a nice offload game and solid defence, it's hard to believe Katoa doesn't demand a spot in the 17. While he was named on the bench in rounds one and two, Katoa was touted to start this week. That hasn't happened and he'll wear No.17. Worryingly, Josh Curran, a prominent edge forward returning from injury, has been named outside the 17, so watch the late mail.

Verdict: BUY - Back in the eyeballs which told us he's here to stay.

Jamil Hopoate Broncos 2RF ($171,900) Avg: 33PPG. Rd 2: 47 points Named to start on the edge for the Broncos (for suspended Tevita Pangai Jr), Hopoate is one of the few -bottom-dollar cheapies locked in to make money. Scores of 19 points (19 minutes) in round one, followed by 47 points (80 minutes) in round two are promising and given TPJ's absence and news David Fifita could be five to six weeks away, there could be enough of a window to make some serious money. KFC SuperCoach Stats has Hopoate conservatively jumping $100k in the next three weeks, even with scores in the 30s.

Verdict: BUY - Looks a solid, short-term win. Sell in round six or seven when TPJ returns, or possibly even hold until Fifita is back.

Kurt Mann Knights CTW/FLB ($287,100) Avg: 53.5PPG. Rd 2: 58 points Mann proved all the doubters wrong in the first two rounds with scores of 49 and 58 points, including a try and a try assist, but also some very solid base stats around the 30 to 35-point range. His halves spot is locked in - he has been named to start this week - but keep an eye out for young gun Phoenix Crossland, who may well have won the No.6 jersey to start the season had it not been for injury.

Verdict: BUY - Every single Kallum Watkins owner should be making this move, and those who already own, sit tight - you'll be making at least $100k in coming weeks.

Emre Guler Raiders FRF ($220,700) Avg: 69PPG. Rd 2: 44 points Guler was all the rage before shutdown, scoring 138 points across his first two matches, sitting with a BE of -69 and with a projected $85,000 price rise after round three. But a lot has changed. John Bateman's likely inclusion in round four will push Corey Horsburgh into the middle rotation exclusively, leaving Guler as likely the last middle forward off the bench. And Hudson Young (suspension) will return in round six. So the extended minutes Guler had in the first two rounds are likely to dip to the 30s quick smart. He will make money, just not as much as first thought.

Verdict: LOW-END BUY - If you already own him, great, but I would not be jumping on unless Bateman is ruled out for a few extra weeks.

Braden Wiliame Dragons CTW ($201,000) Avg: 33PPG. Rd 2: 43 points Scores of 23 and 43 points don't yell "pick me", but something tells me Wiliame has this spot locked down. The Dragons welcome back a host of injured players but all are in the pack. There was one Dragon dropped in the backline, and that was the far more established Tim Lafai, so the safety is there that he's first choice at this point, well ahead of Lafai and Euan Aitken (on bench). A BE of -3 isn't earth shattering, but all it takes is one try to accelerate things.

Verdict: BUY - A very safe (selection wise), low-priced option.

Tyrell Fuimaono Dragons CTW/2RF ($201,000) Avg: 51PPG. Rd 2: 75 points Flashback to the Dragons v Panthers in round two and Fuimaono looked like Jason Taumalolo at times. The 75 points came in 72 minutes with 31 tackles, 10 points in tackle busts, a line break and 22 points in H8s. Like many a cheapie flying high back then, Fuimaono is dealing with the return of established players from injury, in this case the Sims brothers and Cam McInnes. But he's kept his spot, with Lafai, Merrin and Luke dropped before him. It's well deserved.

Verdict: BUY - Bench edge players are normally KFC SuperCoach poison but that 75-point score will stay in Fui's rolling average for three weeks, even while he is off the bench. Handy dual position switch with Isaah Yeo, too.

Ben Hampton Cowboys CTW/FLB ($237,000) Avg: 55PPG. Rd 2: 61 points Just when you think Hampton wouldn't have any upside, he returns scores of 49 and 61 points in the first two rounds with a try in each game. That leaves Hampton with a BE of -36 and projected price rise of $60k after round three. Kallum Watkins owners should take a hard look here, but he is firmly below Kurt Mann, as without a try he will put up a score of 25 or less and halt the price rises. Playing the Titans this weekend could kick him on big time, though.

Verdict: LOW-END BUY - I don't think these scores will continue, but if they do it could be worthwhile jumping on?

Josh Kerr Dragons FRF/2RF ($233,000) Avg: 37PPG. Rd 2: 38 points Talked up in pre-season after a stellar All-Stars performance, Kerr was rumoured to be one of the casualties of the hiatus with the Sims and McInnes returning. Playing around the 30 to 40-minute mark in his first two matches it was touted to be between him, Tyrell Fuimaono, Jacob Host and Trent Merrin for the final two bench spots. But Kerr remains. Huge. No real room for expanded minutes but great news Kerr kept his spot.

Verdict: HOLD - Not a buy, but those who own him take the win.

Billy Walters Tigers HFB/HOK ($201,000) Avg: 49PPG. Rd 2: 47 points Ugh. What a disaster the shutdown was for one of the KFC SuperCoach good news stories. Billy started with 51 and 47 points playing the full 80 minutes both weeks and was looking at some fantastic early-season price rises. Fast forward three months and we have Harry Grant starting at hooker, along with Luke Brooks and Moses Mbye healthy (no opening in the halves). Walters played so well I think he will have great impact off the bench. It just may be much less exciting in terms of output.

Verdict: HOLD - Make the switch to Harry Grant or Fogarty in the halves in a few weeks.

Harry Grant Tigers HOK ($184,900) Huge. Grant named to start in his first game at the club. Here's the upside of the Walters discussion. The Cameron Smith comparisons grow louder and most predicted teams out there seem to have Grant leapfrogging Walters for a starting berth. If Grant (below) finds his way into 65+ minutes at hooker he will likely not only be a buy, he will be a best-17 player most weeks given the attacking upside and his solid defence.

Verdict: WATCHLIST - You can almost certainly lock in a Brailey to Grant switch in two weeks.

Gehamat Shibasaki Knights CTW ($286,400) Avg: 39PPG. Rd 2: 37 points Not a bad start in the opening rounds without any attacking stats. If 40-ish is his "floor" then he will be a nice money-maker for KFC SuperCoaches. Holds his spot in the starting side on the back of those performances, and although Bradman Best is named on an extended bench, I anticipate if a late change were to happen it would be for Enari Tuala, not Gehamat.

Verdict: LOW-END BUY - Solid low-priority cheapie no one is talking about.

Bradman Best Knights CTW ($240,700) Here's potentially a good result after the hiatus. Pre-season cheapie favourite (was in 45 per cent of teams before injury), Best has been named on an extended bench. While that isn't amazing news, you'd expect him (right) to feature over Tuala at left centre, if not straight away as a late inclusion, then in the coming weeks. One that we wouldn't have had for many weeks had the shutdown not happened.

Verdict: WATCHLIST - Keep an eye on late mail.

Pat Mago Rabbitohs FRF ($184,900) What a monster this guy is and named on the bench. A real beneficiary of the COVID-19 break as he killed it in pre-season, according to Damien Cook, and was likely to debut until he went down with a ruptured pec. Now he is hitting the track hard and at $184k with a dream -KFC SuperCoach-style game, he's a lock to make good cash and be one of our cheapies of the year in the front row.

Verdict: BUY - But wait a few weeks on this one. I'm predicting Braden Uele-style numbers from last year if he gets the chance.

Tex Hoy Knights 5/8 ($171,900) This kid is exciting. The roommate of Kalyn Ponga is a chip off the old bunkie if reports are to be believed, and with Ponga suspended for round three he gets his chance to debut at fullback - and is likely to kick goals too. One to watch, and if anything serious were to happen to Ponga at any stage to give Hoy a prolonged period in the side, he will be a stellar KFC SuperCoach cheapie.

Verdict: WATCHLIST - With no Origin during the season, Hoy's only look-in is suspension/injury.

Josh Curran Warriors 2RF ($216,900) There was strong pre-season mail after a big All Stars performance that Curran would be at the forefront of the Warriors' backrow plans. Then he got injured and missed the early rounds. Wacko now has Curran getting the starting edge gig that KFC SuperCoach cheapie favourite Elisea Katoa nabbed in round two and looked fantastic in. Curran found his way to the extended bench, but it looks like he's a wait-and-see for now.

Verdict: WATCHLIST - Very good value if he gets a start. Hopefully not at the expense of Katoa.

Will Kennedy Sharks CTW/FLB ($242,600) Avg: 44.5PPG. Rd 2: 45 points This one sucks as Kennedy was your typical "pick him for a specific time frame to make money" selection, knowing Matt Moylan and Josh Dugan were multiple weeks away with injury. And Kennedy has started brilliantly (44 and 45). Now, switch on here. Even though Kennedy is named to start at fullback this week, expect Moylan (named on extended bench) to be a real chance of a late inclusion.

Verdict: AVOID - Not an urgent sell even if he is dropped in a late change. Will make $40k-$60k next time he plays a match.

Renouf To'omaga Bulldogs 2RF ($244,700) Avg: 44PPG. Rd 2: 54 points To'omaga started very well with 33 and 54 points in rounds one and two - all the more impressive given they came in 30 and 25 minutes respectively. Joe Stimson is out long term, and we all know what has happened to CHN, so To'omaga, Britt (named to start) and the returning Faitala-Mariner look set to usurp all the available minutes. Don't mind this because a POD move with the extra trades negates the risk.

Verdict: LOW-END BUY

Zane Musgrove Tigers FRF ($201,000) Avg: 26PPG, Rd 2: 29 points There he goes. Dropped after scores of 23 and 29 points in rounds one and two. It has been underwhelming for a guy with NRL experience. There was a marked improvement from week one to week two, which can maybe be explained by the several-year absence from the game. But thankfully those who read the Cheapie Bible had him firmly in third on the FRF cheapie list to start the season behind Toby Rudolf and JTB.

Verdict: SELL

GONE!

Kallum Watkins Titans CTW ($271,800) Avg: 36PPG, Rd 2: 24 points Tragically, England centre Watkins has been forced to quit the NRL to return home after his father was -diagnosed with the coronavirus. He will not play another game this -season. We wish he and his family the best. Verdict: MUST TRADE now
---
Interstate showpiece a sure thing in revamped 2020 season

NRL innovation boss Wayne Pearce has given State of Origin the green light for lift-off under the code's Project -Apollo program, with Fox Sports ready to pounce for rugby league's showpiece event.

Pearce has erased any doubt over the future of Origin this season, insisting the coronavirus pandemic will not halt the 40th anniversary of interstate clashes between NSW and Queensland this season.

And the battle for broadcast rights is hotting up, with Fox Sports' rugby league arm expressing interest in covering the $90 million three-game -series amid question marks over Channel 9's funding -contribution to the NRL.

The NRL premiership is set for an abbreviated 2020 campaign and there were fears a scheduling squeeze on the club season would leave no time to accommodate the six-week Origin battle in the calendar.

The newly-formed NRL innovation committee will meet on Thursday to provide definitive answers for the season structure, but chairman Pearce, a NSW legend, is -adamant Origin will not be axed this year.

"State of Origin is definitely happening," said Pearce, who played 15 Origin games.

"Where we schedule Origin will depend on the competition structure and whether we go ahead with two (club) conferences ... do we play Origin at the back end of the season, the start or the middle?

"The pros and cons will be discussed so everything will be put on the table for us at our meeting next week, but Origin is definitely on the radar." ARL Commission chairman Peter V'landys backed Pearce's assessment, saying: "We are determined to play State of Origin this year.

"If we start the season in September, we can just fit -Origin into the schedule." Channel 9 is the broadcasting home of State of Origin, but whether the dulcet tones of Ray Warren will be heard calling the names of Queensland and NSW stars this season remains to be seen.

On Wednesday, the NRL failed to receive its quarterly broadcasting payment of around $46.2 million from Channel 9, which stands to save $130 million if the COVID-19 crisis forces the cancellation of the 2020 season.

The NRL is increasingly confident of a return to play later this season. But if Origin is scheduled for September, October or November - the spring months that Channel 9 insists is not a hot ratings period for rugby league - it could open the door for Fox Sports to beef-up its league programming.

Channel 9 has the exclusive rights to Origin but if the -network baulks at a funding package, Fox Sports head of television Steve Crawley said the pay TV operator would put out the welcome mat.

"Rugby league is our staple at Fox," Crawley said.

There are suggestions the Origin series could kick off the relaunch of the NRL season and former Queensland skipper Darren Lockyer is not opposed to that idea."Both teams would be coming from the same base so I don't see any issue starting the season again with Origin straight away," he said.
---
At first glance Antifa may look like a bunch of pimple-faced anarchists, but their aims are far more sinister

On the face of it, Antifa may appear to be a bunch of pimply activists. Yet just because they don't look like -Islamist terrorists or a hostile -uniformed army does not mean they are any less of a threat to democracy.

Because ultimately, they are globalised, networked, decentralised and violent. Antifa are terrorists whose modus operandi is to infect peaceful protests in order to instigate the use of force by police. The risk is a popular backlash against the government. And they present our geopolitical adversaries such as China and Russia with opportunities to destabilise our system from within.

In a world full of snakes Antifa are no less of a threat to Australia than anyone else, due to their tactic of "people's war".

In a people's war, an insurgent force is organised into small units, dependent on support from within the local population. This is built through infiltrating layers of a government, community and civil society, now hyper-connected and instantly mobilised by -social media.

This idea of the people's war developed by North Vietnamese military leader Nguygen Giap, followed Mao Zedong's thesis On Guerrilla Warfare. Argentinian Marxist revolutionary, Che Guevara (1928 - 1967) was also a fan.

Spontaneous general uprisings are one of their most effective tools, especially where weak-kneed elected representatives surround the executive branch of government.

The laws of separation suggest the seven and a half thousand Australian Antifa Facebook supporters have potential to create our own nightmare. Easy to initiate, low cost to -resource, and self-escalating where anyone can join.

The grain-fed, Nike sneaker-wearing, iPhone-carrying Antifa of today is not a new phenomenon.

When confronted with the Anarchists, the 1900s terrorist phenomenon of his time, US President Theodore Roosevelt said: "The anarchist is the enemy of humanity, the enemy of all mankind and is a deeper degree of criminality than any other." It was one of the most successful terrorist movements of the time.

One of Karl Marx's rivals, Russian revolutionary Mikhail Bakunin (1814 - 76), declared: "We recognise no other activity but the work of extermination. We admit the forms in which the activity will show itself will be extremely varied - poison, the knife, the rope etc … In this struggle, revolution sanctifies everything alike." From 1892 to 1894 Paris was subjected to eleven bombings.

In 1920, 38 people were killed and hundreds wounded in New York when a horse-drawn cart filled with explosives was detonated on Wall Street.

Even Australia felt the impact of anarchist terrorism. On 28 May 1898 a bomb exploded outside Daniel Maloney's house in the Melbourne suburb of Fitzroy.

It caused a sensation at the time. By 1914 anarchists had attacked sixteen nations. More recent examples are the Italian Red Brigade and the West German Red Army Faction. All could be defined as homegrown -terrorists.

We are living in one of the most precarious times since the Cold War. The West is severely weakened by measures to defeat COVID-19. Powerful geopolitical forces are at play and the stakes are high.

An attack on our system does not need to come via tanks and battleships. Far better to support your enemy's internal enemies and undermine legitimacy from within.

That is why we need to maintain a Sauron's eye for efforts by states to use Antifa as a destabilising proxy force.

If you think all this sounds far-fetched consider how swiftly life can change and events can converge.

The collapse of the Berlin Wall, the Arab Spring, coups in Fiji, riots in the Solomons, Ukraine and now Hong Kong, are good examples.

Some of the most dangerous terrorist and revolutionary organisations such as al Qaeda started as small groups no one took seriously.

On June 8, in the US city of Seattle, Antifa-led insurgents took control of the Capital Hill Precinct (ironically policing barricades with M-4 armed guards). Going in heavy risks making the US look no better than China.

Unlike states or non-state actors with a classic command and control structure, these postmodern anarchists are hard for law enforcement to disrupt.

Use force, you are accused of stepping on their civil rights. Don't use force and innocent people and their property are bashed, looted and set on fire.

Then there is the question of who do you attack?

Effectively, the movement has adopted the TE Lawrence approach of being an idea or a thing, invulnerable, without front or back with a high degree of fluidity of action.

One of Antifa's clever tactics has been to infect peaceful protests such as those in the US and the climate protests in Australia.

Consider how our immune system works.

If Antifa resembled a virus embedded within its host the aim is to create a hyper-immune response. In other words, your own immune system -becomes the killer.

Equally dire is the belief by corporations that the cure requires acquiescing to their demands. Best to deal with them at their origin than at their growth stage.

Our opponents (all non-Western) and non-state actors such as Islamist extremists and now these pimply faced anarchists are flexible and agile.

For example, support by the new-age feminists and social activist movements of nonviolent Islamic extremism and its treatment of women might seem peculiar.

Other examples are the alliance between Hezbollah and Mexican drug cartels, Somali pirates and terrorists, or terrorists and people smugglers in North Africa. Those involved in human and drug trafficking, weapons smuggling and organised crime would happily form alliances with the likes of Antifa.

All thrive on chaos and hate the same system.

Even though they hate our democratic institutions describing Antifa as terrorists will not win many friends in mainstream media or academia.

Yet, threats to Australia will be increasingly dominated by the synthesis of technology, extremism and financing, all employed to advance the strategic interests of our opponents both foreign and domestic.

Recent weeks have shown how internal dissent is never far below the surface and could become one of our most significant political risks. Dr. Jason Thomas is director, Frontier Assessments
---
CURBING discretionary spending and acting early to get help are the keys to being able to cope financially over the coming months.

Many people have already been forced to do this with the closure of restaurants, cafes, pubs, clubs and cinemas across the country.

Income losses are expected to escalate for some time yet amid the COVID-19 pandemic.

Financial services firm Canstar's spokeswoman, Effie Zahos, warned households to cut back unnecessary costs and act quickly if they can't meet repayments. "It's going to get tough," she said.

"If you can't pay your bills, get in touch with your provider and negotiate the repayment terms." Ms Zahos said borrowers who found themselves out of work should investigate hardship provisions offered by financial institutions and seek to have their mortgage payments put on hold.

Renters should check their eligibility for rent relief.

"If you're a renter, talk to your landlord about what you can do," Ms Zahos said. "If you can do some work or trades around the house, then maybe they can reduce your rent in return for you fixing up the house. This is the time when we all have to sit down and go through our budgets and see what expenses are necessary and what you can put on hold." Project engagement officer Renee Royle, 40, said mortgage repayments were her biggest concern if she ended up losing her job. She has been diligent in tucking away money for bills from each pay packet and said the coronavirus outbreak was creating a lot of financial uncertainty.

"The banks have been really good letting people defer repayments so I guess there's options there for me," she said.

"But, at the moment, I'm overspending because I'm buying stuff now just to make sure I've got things in case I might not be able to get them later (if I have to self-isolate)." Origin retail executive general manager Jon Briskin said the energy provider expected a significant increase in customers requesting financial assistance with their bills, as more people lost their jobs in the coronavirus pandemic.

He said disconnections for non-payment of bills had been temporarily suspended and five-week automatic payment extensions put in place.

"We understand that during this difficult and uncertain time, many people will be worried about how they are going to pay their bills," Mr Briskin said.

"For customers who are having difficulty paying their electricity or gas bills, they can easily request bill extensions of up to five weeks online within a few clicks."

WAYS TO EASE STRAIN " Contact your service provider immediately and ask for extra time to pay, for a formal payment plan or to be assessed for their hardship program.

" Work out how much you can afford to pay and budget a repayment schedule. " For more information on coping during COVID-19, visit moneysmart.gov.au" Get free financial counselling through the National Debt Helpline on 1800 007 007.
---
RESEARCH LINKS LIBERAL MP Sarah Henderson says all virus research with foreign nationals should be stopped until a safety and national security review is done.

The call from a member of the Morrison government follows revelations by The Daily Telegraph that the CSIRO's bio-containment facility in Geelong, Victoria has been engaging in research, jointly funded by the Australian and Chinese governments, in conjunction with the Wuhan Institute of Virology which is now the centre of a global probe into the origins of the COVID-19 outbreak.

Senator Henderson told The Telegraph the partnership was "very concerning" from a security and safety perspective.

"I am calling on the CSIRO's Australian Animal Health Laboratory - now known as the Australian Centre for Disease Preparedness - to conduct a full review into its virus research program involving foreign nationals so as to consider all of the national security and biosecurity risks," "This sort of research involving foreign nationals should be put on hold until the review is conducted." Senator Henderson spoke of major security concerns laboratories in the United States and Canada had faced, including attempts to steal virus samples to send back to China, and said a security review should be done of CSIRO's lab.

"The cyber security of our high containment laboratories also needs to be reviewed," she said.

"In January this year, a Harvard professor and two Chinese scientists based in Boston were charged with assisting the Chinese government.

"One of the researchers was arrested at an airport on his way to China with 21 vials of biological samples in his bag." Senator Henderson said while there was no suggestion that any incident occurred at the laboratory in Geelong, this type of research also carried with it very high risks including the threat of a pandemic.

"In 2016, the United States Government Accountability Office identified that -improved oversight of dangerous pathogens in high containment laboratories was required to mitigate risk," she said.

"In 2019, the Bulletin of Atomic Scientists identified that human error in high---bio containment laboratories was a likely pandemic threat. It makes clear that incidents causing potential exposures to pathogens occur frequently in high security laboratories - like the one in Wuhan." Her call comes after a dossier prepared by concerned western governments includes mention of the research that was being undertaken at the Wuhan Institute Of Virology.

The United States has -withdrawn funding from the institute.A CSIRO spokesman said it had no current research involving live bats.
---
Teaching in schools of hard knocks In reference to The Saturday Telegraph's story on school violence, here are some other examples of behaviour encountered by teachers (School under siege, 14/11).

A female school principal gets punched in the face, calls police, student is arrested and taken away in handcuffs.

A pregnant teacher is pushed to the ground by a female student. When the mother is called in to discuss the girl's suspension, she says "well she didn't push her very hard".

A small female teacher tries to break up a fight between two large girls and gets squashed. She is rescued by a boy (one of many watching). When two male colleagues were asked why they didn't intervene, they said the girls would probably accuse them of inappropriate sexual touching.

I could go on with many more examples. These are just recent ones that happened to members of my own family.

Name withheld, NSW "" " In the 1950s and '60s this behaviour seldom occurred and I suggest the Education Department should go back in time and find out why.

Teachers were held in high esteem and kids would never have behaved in the way that is occurring in classrooms now.

It is high time drastic action was taken otherwise the kids are going to walk right over teachers. I am sorry teachers have to put up with this.

New directives should come from principals and the education department; it should never have been left to come this far.

It is no use leaving these sort of kids in the classroom to disrupt everybody else and hope it goes away.

J.A. Jones, Tea Gardens

An Origin win won't wipe Queensland's COVID sins The political pointscoring that Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk is attempting to achieve is simply dumbfounding (Border deal still an open question, 14/11).

Her current closed border to the majority of NSW's population smacks of a Machiavellian plot, not to mention the serious harm it's had on many people both sides of the border.

Funnily enough though, come State of Origin on Wednesday they've reviewed their gathering rules to allow full capacity at Suncorp Stadium, albeit they're restricting NSW-based supporter or commentary participation, unless isolation is taken.

Clearly Palaszczuk and her mouthpiece, chief health officer Dr Jeannette Young, have little regard for the damage they have done, and regardless of the result of Wednesday night's Origin game, Queenslanders should hang their heads in shame.

Peter Cattlin, Freshwater "" " If the Queensland government is not prepared to allow the Channel 9 commentary team of Ray Warren and others into the state for the third State of Origin, Peter V'landys and the NRL should move the game back to Sydney from Brisbane (Rabs not welcome among 50,000 rabid Queenslanders, 14/11).

See what Annastacia's reaction would be then. There is absolutely no COVID-19 or medical reason why the commentary team could not travel up and back on the day.

Paul Purcell, Soldiers Point

Slow, steady and ... safe As people complain about borders still being closed and being deprived of a sense of normality, let's not forget COVID-19 is still with us.

Looking at the northern hemisphere, which has suffered a resurgence of cases higher than that of earlier in the year, with lockdowns again being considered, we need to not let our guard down.

Victoria has shown us what can happen if poor contract tracing and insufficient testing occurs.

Even with a vaccine on the horizon promising a 90 per cent success rate, that means 2.5 million Australians could still be susceptible to getting it.

Even now testing sewage water has found traces of coronavirus and people are urged to get tested.

People that are asymptomatic, that could be carriers and spreaders without knowing it, are naively walking among us.

Our new habits of social distancing, wearing masks, hand washing for 20 seconds, using hand sanitiser and limiting numbers at venues could be with us for the foreseeable future.

There is an old saying: "Slow and steady wins the race." Let's be careful and take things a step at a time.

Joe Kovac, Prestons

Timely intervention An army of nurses sent in to heal schools is a sound, commonsense strategy indeed (Nurse army to the rescue, 15/11).

Teachers need to focus on teaching kids and these nurses will be the essential frontliners to treat and refer pupils with mental health and medical issues.

Experts stress that helping vulnerable kids at a critical early stage greatly helps to reduce their chances of them transitioning to mentally troubled adults.

Something about "a stitch in time saves nine".

Steve Ngeow, Chatswood

Fighting back on trade China has broken our "free trade agreement" by banning some of our first-class imports, therefore I propose we ban all Chinese imports (China's new slap to Australia, 14/11).

We may have to rough it for a while as everything has the label "made in China" these days.

But, who can forget those first-rate "whitegoods" Australia used to produce that never broke down or our clothing "made in Australia" that never wore out, just went out of fashion. Come on Aussie, come on.

Janice Russell, Malua Bay

Slow to realise peril Commenting on MP Joel Fitzgibbon's exit from Labor's front bench, Anna Caldwell gets it right when she says the shortsighted criticism of him by people like Mark Dreyfus and other left MPs will only further "alienate potential Labor voters who happen to agree with Fitzgibbon" (Labor throwing Fitz, 13/11).

While these left-wingers are quick to shoot off their mouth, they're a bit slow on the uptake.

Tom, Killarney Vale

Tone it down, Donald How much more conclusive evidence do Donald Trump and his obsessed supporters want after senior US federal and state officials released a statement saying there was "no evidence" that votes were lost or changed, or voting systems corrupted, and that the election turned out to be the most secure in American history.

Donald Trump's massive ego is getting in the way of him accepting defeat and his rhetoric continues to inflame tensions (MAGA march rocks US - Online, 15/11).

Unfortunately for Americans the next few months will be chaotic until Joe Biden's inauguration.

History will judge Trump very harshly if he doesn't put the country first and accept that he lost the election fair and square.

Warren Cato, Manyana

Trump just returning fire For the past four years America's Democrats have done everything in their power to demonise and destroy Donald Trump.

Now he is giving them a hell of a hard time by declaring election fraud and refusing to concede defeat and these hypocritical, unapologetic, underhanded leftists can't stand it.

What you give out in life is what you get back.

David Ingram, Randwick

Briefly ...

Nah - not a chance - that Wayne Bennett guy, he couldn't possibly have another ace up his sleeve, could he? Or could he? I get a tiny bit wary when he gives that lopsided grin - maybe it's because his eyes ain't smiling (Origin 2020, 15/11).

Rosemary O'Brien, Ashfield "" " With the constant stream of failed relationships on reality romance shows it's nice to see Anna Heinrich and Tim Robards, who have been together since 2013, welcome daughter Elle into the world ('Bloody amazing!': Bachelor baby is now a reality, 15/11). Congratulations.

Marg Swindells, Castle Hill

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
Australia leads calls for global inquiry into 'cover-up' BLAME GAME

CHINA'S secrecy and early attempts to downplay the coronavirus outbreak would be scrutinised in an independent global inquiry into the pandemic demanded by Australia.

The Morrison government is leading the international call for an independent review of the COVID-19 crisis to determine the origin of the virus and if more could have been done to slow its spread.

Foreign Minister Marise Payne (inset) said transparency - particularly from the Chinese government - would be "key" to any review.

"An independent review would identify for us (facts) about the genesis of the virus, about the approaches to dealing with it, and addressing it about the openness with which information was shared," she said.

"(And) about interaction with the World Health Organisation … with other international leaders.

"All of those sorts of things will need to be on the table." Ms Payne said every country would need to agree to a mechanism for the review, but argued it should not be done by the WHO as its own activities would likely be assessed.

"We've been able to do those sorts of things in the past for key independent reviews, often on egregious human rights issues, for example," she said.

"But it will need parties and countries to come to the table with a willingness to be transparent and to engage in that process, and also ensure that we have a review mechanism in which the international community can have faith." On Friday China revised its death toll for the city of Wuhan - ground zero of the outbreak - to 3869 fatalities, almost 50 per cent higher than previously reported. According to Chinese state media, these deaths were missed by local officials in Wuhan -because the city's medical facilities were overwhelmed.

Health Minister Greg Hunt said the federal government had confidence in Australia's coronavirus numbers.

"Australia's own figures have been identified by the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine as the most accurate of 83 countries around the world," he said.

China has been criticised for being slow to publicly -announce it had detected clusters of pneumonia cases with no known source in December 2019, preventing health officials from sounding the alarm at the time.

Labor's health spokesman Chris Bowen said the Opposition backed an independent review and as Australia's top diplomat Ms Payne must work to make it a "reality".

How China let down the world SLOW TO CONFIRM VIRUS ■ Chinese authorities only announced cases of pneumonia of an unknown cause on December 31, but the first cluster of patients had been identified on December 21.

■ On January 23, Wuhan was cut off by Chinese authorities, but at least 100,000 people had already left the city via trains.

HEALTH STAFF GAGGED ■ Central Hospital of Wuhan banned staff from discussing the disease. ■ Chinese doctor Dr Li Wenliang allegedly forced to retract his warning. He died from COVID-19.

REPORTERS DENIED ACCESS ■ Hong Kong reporters detained trying to film Wuhan hospital. HOARDED MEDICAL SUPPLIES ■ Chinese companies ordered to source PPE and other medical supplies in early January.

WET MARKETS CONTINUE ■ In February, China said it was reviewing its trade and consumption of wildlife, but later allowed wet markets to reopen.

INFECTION AND DEATH RATES LACK TRANSPARENCY ■ China not counting asymptomatic cases or overseas arrivals. ■ China increased its Wuhan death rate by 50 per cent in one day. COVID-19 EQUIPMENT FAULTY■ Australian Border Force seized 800,000 PPE products imported privately from China that weren't up to standard.
---
The Premier is wrong that NSW is "not good" at making things Last week the Premier asserted that "Australia and New South Wales are not good at building trains, that's why we have to purchase them." This glib dismissal can't go -unchecked, especially when one-fifth of young people in Sydney's southwest are now jobless.

Does the Premier think there's something in our collective psyche that prevents us building trains? Are we scared of manual labour? Or is it something to do with Australian weather patterns? I'd love to know, because it's a line the Government has trotted out several times without feeling a need to ever -explain itself.

Unfortunately, the Premier's lack of belief in our manufacturing capacity -extends beyond trains.

Since 2011, the Liberals and Nationals have offshored the manufacture of all manner of NSW assets.

The new Sydney Convention Centre was built with Chinese steel. The trams running to the eastern suburbs were built in Spain and run on French tracks. That project was hardly a ringing success, blowing out by billions and running months late.

The B-Line buses servicing the Northern Beaches were constructed in Malaysia, while Waratah trains were built in South Korea.

And, of course, the new ferries making their way up and down the Parramatta River were built in Indonesia. These are the same ferries that can't quite fit under a bridge without possibly beheading a commuter.

So when the Premier says we are not very good at making things, could it have something to do with the fact that she's not even trying?

The NSW Government purchasing policy specifically states: "You must not discriminate against suppliers due to their foreign affiliation or ownership, or the origin of their goods or services, for procurements covered by enforceable procurement provisions." And while the policy's chapter on economic development, social outcomes and sustainability promotes procurement from Aboriginal businesses and disability employment organisations, it has no specific weighting to mandate purchasing from Australian businesses, employing Australians.

Compare this with Victoria and Queensland. Under Victoria's Local Jobs First plan, 65 metro trains are being built as part of a $2.3 billion deal, which will generate 1100 local jobs.

Queensland has a similar policy. For all significant government purchases a weighting of up to 30 per cent can apply.

So while Queensland and Victoria actively encourage local companies to build and supply major assets, NSW does quite the opposite.

This policy rot that must be fixed. Last week, it was revealed that one in five young people in Sydney's southwest are now unemployed, a dramatic COVID spike. The Parramatta region wasn't much better, registering a youth unemployment rate of 16 per cent.

The longer these people stay out of the workforce, the harder it is for them to re-engage the habits and skills that create a happy productive worker. It is inconceivable that we would send jobs offshore while young Australians -languish in the dole queues.

But we should also consider our -capacity to respond to emergencies. We saw the danger of strangling local manufacturing at the start of the COVID-19 pandemic. Any self respecting nation should have decent industrial capacity without being overly reliant on international supply chains.

The Premier should take a trip down memory lane before making any further glib assessments of our potential manufacturing muscle. For decades, companies such as Downer and UGL supplied excellent carriages to the NSW rail network.

The Tangara trains continue to serve us well today, while the Millennium trains are renowned for their reliability, despite teething problems when they were first introduced.

We can and should support a strong local manufacturing industry. It's -simply a matter of political will. Mark Morey is Secretary of Unions NSW
---
PAUL McGregor and Dean Pay are not the only two NRL coaches under extreme pressure.

The word out of the Shire is that John Morris needs to quickly get the Sharks back on track.

It hasn't helped losing Bronson Xerri and Josh Morris, but their terrible performance against the Wests Tigers last week raised questions about the coach's future.

Your columnist keeps hearing Cronulla wants Shane Flanagan back once he's cleared by the NRL.

That could be as early as next season now that Todd Greenberg is out of the game and with Peter V'landys prepared to revisit his case.

Whoever is in charge, the Sharks are facing a couple of years of pain until underperforming big names come off contract and they can bring in fresh faces.

Costly move to fullback LATRELL Mitchell is in danger of costing himself $90,000 by playing fullback at the South Sydney Rabbitohs.

That's his match payments for playing for NSW against the Maroons in State of Origin, which has been pushed back this year because of COVID-19 to November 4, 11 and 18.

Latrell is no hope of playing fullback ahead of James Tedesco or Tom Trbojevic. However, it's a different story if he is playing his best football in the centres.

Trbojevic and Jack Wighton played centre last year after Latrell was dropped, but Wighton could easily be switched to five-eighth if necessary.

The money is important to Latrell in a season where he has already lost $100,000 by rejecting the Roosters' $800,000 offer, to take $700,000 at the Rabbitohs.

Bennett blame game IT'S interesting Anthony Seibold is copping all the blame for the disarray at the Brisbane Broncos. This is not entirely fair.

People seem to have forgotten who actually assembled this team and put Anthony Milford on $1 million, Jack Bird on $900,000 and Darius Boyd on $800,000.

His name is Wayne Bennett.

The Broncos have slumped to the two worst losses in history in their past five games.

The scoreline has been 93-6 against them in the past two weeks. This is not the first time Bennett has left a club on its knees. Think Newcastle and his departure in 2014 and the wooden spoons in 2015, 2016 and 2017.
---
NSW Origin legend Benny Elias has labelled the Queensland government "nuts" for turning its back on State of Origin, saying: "We'll take all three games with open arms." The 2020 Origin series appears up for tender, with Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk sensationally CONTINUED PAGE 64 FROM BACK PAGE ruling Brisbane out as host during the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. Palaszczuk has also suggested the interstate series be scrapped entirely this year, or played sometime over summer, saying she is "really concerned" about the health risk to Queensland players.

So with the Banana Benders now out, Blues greats Elias and Steve Roach have urged Sydney to take control of all three games, suggesting Bankwest Stadium would be the "perfect" venue if fans are locked out.

"For the Queenslanders to say they don't want Origin, they're kidding themselves," Elias said.

"Honestly, they're nuts. I understand that, right now, health is everything. It goes without saying. But even with the NRL relaunch date of May 28, it's still a long way off.

"Especially right now, when every day is an eternity. But if Queensland doesn't want Origin, who cares? They've been screaming and carrying on recently about how much they want the NRL grand final, offering up massive amounts of money to try and take it away from Sydney. Yet now they're giving up the event of the year?

"Saying they don't want to be involved with a series that brings in record TV ratings and boasts global appeal? Queensland continues to humour me." Roach agreed, adding: "Doesn't this premier want to win another election up there?

An Origin game in Brisbane, it's like Christmas Day to them. So to just give that away … what else can we say but 'thank you, thank you, thank you'." Speaking to Channel 9 yesterday, Palaszczuk not only cast doubt on Origin being played in Brisbane during the health pandemic but questioned how the event could be held anywhere.

"I love the footy as much as everyone else," said the premier, who is also against sending Queensland's three NRL clubs to Sydney to restart the competition. "I think it's devastating we're not going to see State of Origin this year. We always have a State of Origin, but how can you have it? Maybe in December? Let's keep our fingers crossed." Apart from turning her back on Origin, Palaszczuk said she was also against Queensland's three NRL clubs moving to Sydney in order to restart the season by May 28.

"I'm really concerned about my Queensland players going down to Sydney," she said."All you need is one community transmission down in Sydney and the whole team could possibly have it."
---
WHILE NATHAN CLEARY HAS PUSHED PENRITH TO THE TOP OF THE CLASS, BRISBANE ISN'T THE ONLY BIG CLUB FACING A LONG FINISH TO THE SEASON, WRITES PAUL CRAWLEY

1st Panthers A+ Prediction: 3rd Record: 8 wins, 1 loss, 1 draw Points differential: +96 I wasn't a fan of Ivan Cleary blowing kisses at a Wests Tigers punter a few weeks back, regardless of how poorly the bloke was behaving. But what is impressive is the job Cleary has done getting the Panthers to the top of the NRL ladder at the halfway point of what has been an incredibly tough season so far.

From picking up buy-of-the-season Api Koroisau to the continued improvement of players across the board, including big Billy Kikau, James Fisher-Harris and young sensation Stephen Crichton.

However, the most spectacular development relates to his son, Nathan. Since taking full control following James Maloney's departure, young Cleary's game has now evolved to the point where he is consistently the NRL's most dominant No.7. Perhaps most surprisingly, he's still only 22.

2nd Eels A+ Prediction: 4th Record: 8 wins, 2 losses.

Points differential: +110 Can be prone to occasional stumbles, like they had against Manly last round. But Parramatta is still a serious footy team and a legitimate title contender. While the focus was on who the Sea Eagles were missing last week, don't forget Brad Arthur was also without Mitchell Moses, Ryan Matterson and Blake Ferguson. They have conceded the fewest points this season - just under 12 a game - and have strike power all over the park with more run metres, tackle busts and offloads than any rivals.

3rd Storm A Prediction: 1st Record: 8 wins, 2 losses Points differential: +109 For the past few years I've been writing a similar report card at this point of the season relating to why the Storm continue to surprise. The thing is, it's no longer a surprise. Last year Craig Bellamy lost Billy Slater on the back of Cooper Cronk's exit and we assumed it would be Bellamy's greatest challenge since the salary cap scandal. Yet they finished runaway minor premiers. But they've gone to another level again this year - and the brutal physicality of their round-eight win over the Roosters was the season's benchmark.

4th Knights B+ Prediction: 7th Record: 6 wins, 3 losses, 1 draw Points differential: +47 The jury's still out on the Knights as far as I'm concerned. They were a lot better against Souths last round but Kalyn Ponga needs to play that way every week for Newcastle to be up with the fair-dinkum contenders. If only they all played with the same intensity as young Bradman Best. You could throw the 18-year-old a NSW Origin jumper right now and he wouldn't look out of place. Kurt Mann also deserves a mention, as did Daniel Saifiti before his injury. In their favour is that five out of their next seven games are in Newcastle.

5th Roosters B+ Prediction: 2nd Record: 6 wins, 4 losses Points differential: +152 A season-ending injury to Victor Radley is the main reason I've now got the Storm as the team to beat. But while Radley is a huge loss, as long as Luke Keary and James Tedesco stay injury-free they will take some beating. They are scoring just under 29 points a game and five tries - the most of any team. They didn't play well against Canberra last round yet were a forward pass away from winning - similar to when they played against Melbourne and mistakes cost them but they still only lost by two points. The best team since the Brisbane and Canberra sides of the 1990s.

6th Raiders A Prediction: 5th Record: 6 wins, 4 losses Points differential: +35 Have beaten Melbourne and the Roosters since the COVID-19 resumption, and to get the points against the premiers last round, given their huge injury toll, was a massive effort. Still, missing Josh Hodgson for the rest of the season is the Raiders' Mount Everest mission, although it sure helps having John Bateman being named on the extended bench this week. Won't write them off and, as we saw against the Roosters, losing Hodgson may even make Jack Wighton and George Williams more dangerous because it's now their job to own the result.

7th Wests Tigers B Prediction: 10th Record: 5 wins, 5 losses Points differential: +68 Hooray for Harry Grant. He plays with a flair and energy that are just a joy to watch, and has sure added some much-needed class to the Tigers. The way coach Michael Maguire has gone about challenging everyone by having the cahoonas to drop Benji Marshall and Luke Brooks has also set a benchmark for performance. Still, beating the Broncos 48-0 last week was one thing, let's see them back it up against Parra before we start spruiking their finals credentials. I've still got them finishing 10th because consistency has been the club's Achilles heel for years, having not strung together three wins since early 2018, and not winning four straight since 2012.

8th Rabbitohs D Prediction: 9th Record: 5 wins, 5 losses Points differential: +32 A really disappointing effort so far and the finger needs to be pointed at the Rabbitohs' big-gun spine. If Cody Walker, Damien Cook, Adam Reynolds and Latrell Mitchell don't lift - and soon - the Bunnies can forget about the finals this year. The fact is as hardworking as their pack is, they just don't have the firepower to dominate like they used to when Sam Burgess and John Sutton were leading the charge - and for that reason they're not in my eight as it stands. Yet they showed in the final 15 minutes against Newcastle last weekend what they are capable of if they put their minds to it, although that only adds to the disappointment.

9th Sharks C Prediction: 8th Record: 5 wins, 5 losses Points differential: +32 Have the ability to beat any team but don't have the consistency. If they find it, look out. While they got 50 put on them by Penrith in round nine, the two weeks before they put 40 on both the Titans and Manly, and did the same against the Warriors last round. Shaun Johnson deserves credit for turning his season around and Sione Katoa has been outstanding. If Matt Moylan and Andrew Fifita can shake off their injuries you wouldn't want to be facing Cronulla in the run home. But that's the big if.

10th Sea Eagles C Prediction: 7th Record: 5 wins, 5 losses Points differential: -26 No luck on the injury front or with refereeing decisions, which is why Manly get a pass mark - just. Were robbed against Parra in round four and against Newcastle in round eight, while they've been without Tom Trbojevic and Dylan Walker since round six. But while the win against Canberra was one of their gutsiest, they were shocking against the Sharks and the Dragons.Will take a lot out of last week's win over the Eels without Turbo and Walker and come charging home.

11th Dragons D Prediction: 11th Record: 4 wins, 6 losses Points differential: -10 A huge game against arch rivals Cronulla this Saturday is going to tell us a lot more about how far the Dragons have come in the past six weeks since that disastrous loss to Canterbury. Paul McGregor looked gone but they have bounced back with four wins and only two defeats. They are playing with much more confidence since Ben Hunt moved to dummy half. But Corey Norman's form is still nowhere near where it needs to be for the Dragons to trouble the better teams.

12th Cowboys D- Prediction: 12th Record: 3 wins, 7 losses Points differential: -70 The fact that their only premiership- winning coach Paul Green was sent packing at the season's halfway point highlights what another shocker of a year it has been for North Queensland. That the 12th- placed Cowboys are travelling the best of the northern state's three teams should be an embarrassment to Queensland rugby league. Occasionally show some spark with the ball but their defence has been dreadful, and trying to find a positive is not easy, aside from Jason Taumalolo.

13th Warriors D Prediction: 16th Record: 3 wins, 7 losses.

Points differential: -133 Hard to be too tough on the Warriors given what they have had to deal with. But to be honest you just knew this was going to be another forgettable year the moment they went to Newcastle for the opening round and got pumped 20-0. From that moment, Steve Kearney was always going to struggle to keep his job. Averaging under 13 points a game is the worst in the club's history,while conceding 26 points is their worst since 2004 (second worst in club history).

14th Broncos F Prediction: 13th Record: 3 wins, 7 losses Points differential: -157 This is not just embarrassing now, what's going on at Brisbane is a rugby league disaster. Remember, Andrew Johns predicted the Broncos would win the comp last year - and just about every expert had them as top-four contenders. But the game's most powerful and resourced club is now plummeting towards its worst-ever finish, losing seven of eight games since the return from the COVID-19 shutdown, while conceding a phenomenal 31 points a game on average. Currently 14th on the ladder. To put that in perspective, the Broncos' previous worst result was 12th in 2013 - that goes back to when they entered the league in 1988.

15th Titans E Prediction: 15th Record: 3 wins, 7 losses Points differential: -159 If your child was struggling at school as much as the Titans do every year on the NRL ladder, you'd probably tell them it was time to cut their losses and go out and find a real job. Seriously, they get the same salary cap every year as the rest of the NRL clubs but it's always money down the drain. This year again their statistics are entering all-time low proportions, scoring a club record fewest points (128), conceding their most (287) and having their worst points differential after 10 games. If you want a positive, at least they beat the Broncos.

16th Bulldogs C- Prediction: 14th Record: 1 win, 9 losses Points differential: -126 They might be last on the ladder but at least the Bulldogs' players still turn up and give close to their best more often than not. So I don't blame the players for what has gone wrong at Canterbury in recent years. As for the board and the administration, that's another matter. How a club as rich and powerful as Canterbury got into such a sad state is the real embarrassment.
---
JOSH Aloiai will bring his boots or his lawnmower when the Wests Tigers play Manly as part of a bumper Anzac Day round seven clash.

The Tigers and Manly grudge match will join the annual games between St George Illawarra and the Roosters and Melbourne playing the Warriors on April 25 - which falls on a Sunday next year.

While it is likely Aloiai will be lining up for the Sea Eagles in that match, his future still remains uncertain ahead of his planned return to Tigers training on Monday.

The Tigers have ramped up negotiations with Broncos forward Joe Ofahengaue in recent days which would free Aloiai to join Manly -immediately.

The first half of next season is dominated by grudge matches and players seeking retribution against their former clubs. Payne Haas and new Titans recruit Tino Fa'asuamaleaui won't have to wait long to renew their rivalry in what is a now highly anticipated local derby between Brisbane and the Gold Coast on the Gold Coast in round two. David Fifita will play against the Broncos for the first time.

A week later, the Roosters and South Sydney will showdown in round three after again dominating headlines in the off-season regarding the tug of war for the long-term signature of youngster Joseph Suaalii.

Tyson Frizell will get an early chance to impress against former club St George Illawarra in round four when the Knights host the Dragons.

The Warriors have been slated to host games in Auckland despite the ongoing uncertainty regarding COVID-19. One of their first home games will be up against Addin Founa-Blake's former club Manly in round five. The clubs clash again just four weeks later.

ARL chairman Peter V'landys said he expected the Warriors to be able to travel freely between Australia and New Zealand for matches.

"We're very confident that the international borders will be open by that stage," V'landys said.

"We all know a vaccine is -imminent - at least we hope it is. "Every decision we've taken at the NRL, we have done on the scientific data and the expert advice from the best biosecurity expert in -Australia, who is very balanced.

"He tells us that he believes we will be playing our games in New Zealand in the first round. If it doesn't happen we have contingencies in place for all scenarios." Brothers Blayke and Jayden Brailey could finally get a chance to play against each other in round six when the Knights host Cronulla.

One of the game's emerging rivalries Canterbury and Penrith will play in round 12. The Bulldogs have already pinched coach Trent Barrett, prop Jack Hetherington and rising half Matt Burton from the Panthers.

Barrett will also coach against former club Manly in rounds 16 and 24. St George Illawarra recruit Jack Bird faces his former club the -Broncos in round 13.

While most of the high profile showdowns happen in the early part of the season, Kyle Flanagan will have to wait until round 17 when his Bulldogs play the Roosters. New Dragons coach Anthony Griffin won't coach against his former club Penrith until round 22.

The draw will be announced today.

2021 GRUDGE MATCHES *Round two: Brisbane v Gold Coast The fuse has already been lit for this local derby after Payne Haas and new Titans recruit Tino Fa'asuamaleaui traded fists in Origin II. The Titans have also signed former Bronco David Fifita on one of the richest contracts in the game.

*Round three: South Sydney v Sydney Roosters Bitter rivals who do not need any extra motivation to incite their fans. This off-season again put the two teams against each other for the long-term signature of youngster Joseph Suaalii. There is a suggestion Suaalii could be cleared to play before his 18th birthday in a potential showdown against South Sydney.

*Round three: Penrith v Melbourne The Panthers get to host the grand final rematch. While there is no way of avenging their premiership loss, they can show there is no lingering mental torment by beating the Storm.

*Round four: Newcastle v Dragons Tyson Frizell won't have to wait long to play his former club. And he gets to do so in front of his new home fans. Frizell was one of the highest-profile defections.

* Rounds five and round nine: Manly v Warriors Manly will have to try to stop Addin Fonua-Blake twice in five weeks. Fonua-Blake wanted out of the Sea Eagles and quickly found a home at the Warriors.

*Round six: South Sydney v Wests Tigers Can the Tigers do what South Sydney couldn't and ensure James Roberts stays on track? By round six we should know if the Tigers' gamble is paying off or not.

*Round seven: Wests Tigers v Manly It could be BYO paintbrushes depending on what plays out for Josh Aloiai. It is unclear which team he will turn out for this week but there is little loved lost between the two clubs.

*Round 12: Penrith v Canterbury First Canterbury pinched Trent Barrett. Then it was Jack Hetherington and now it is Matt Burton. And you get the sense the Bulldogs aren't done with rampaging through Penrith's stocks.

*Round 13: Dragons v Broncos Jack Bird had an unhappy stint at Brisbane, where he struggled with injuries. He gets the chance at his junior club to show if he is back to his best.

*Round 17: Canterbury v Roosters Kyle Flanagan was made the scapegoat at the Roosters. He has quickly been embraced by the Bulldogs faithful. He has to wait a while to show the Roosters what they are missing out on.
---
NEW TIGER GETS REAL-LIFE OPPORTUNITY AFTER 'SIMULATING' TEDESCO

DAINE Laurie has been asked twice before to fill the boots of James Tedesco - or at least give his best impersonation.

So the livewire from Iluka studied the tapes and watched Roosters games live. Then when Thursday evening rolled around and Penrith coach Ivan Cleary ran his boys out for their weekly opposed session at Panthers HQ, Laurie did his best to mimic the style, sweeps and everything else rugby league's No. 1 fullback has in his bag of tricks.

Officially, Laurie was part of the Cougars - a name last year given to those Penrith NSW Cup players who, with their own competition cancelled during COVID-19, grew increasingly fond of Thursday scrimmages against the NRL boys.

"Because that became our game day," the new Wests Tigers fullback recalled now, five months on.

"Or that's how we viewed it.

"If first grade were playing the Roosters, then it was up to us Cougars - that's what they called us - to learn, then run the Roosters sets against them.

"And before every session, we'd speak as a group about how important it was to rip in and get that right.

"To make sure we did everything we could to help the boys out. "So while it was frustrating for me to watch them out there on the weekends, winning and having so much fun, it was also my job to make sure it kept happening." Which, as you can imagine, had really ramped up for Laurie and his Cougars come October.

When in that week before the NRL finals, and with Penrith on an undefeated run stretching 15 games, he again mimicked that Roosters fullback who, days later, against Nathan Cleary, Stephen Crichton and Viliame Kikau, would be dusted in an upset loss, just like they were in round one.

So as for again being called in to replace the NSW Origin megastar, this time in the Tigers jersey he quit four years ago?

"I've always liked Tedesco, obviously," Laurie said. "But it's not who I model my game on.

"No, that's my uncle Cody Walker," this newest Tiger, only 21, added. "Just the way he plays - eyes up, good hands, that's how I want to be. But James Tedesco, yeah, he's definitely next level." Which isn't anything Wests Tigers fans need to be told again. Especially given this afternoon at Campbelltown Sports Stadium, and with the little 'c' next to his name, Tedesco once more returns to cause carnage against the club he was supposed to bring greatness.

Indeed, it has now been almost four years to the day since the Menangle farm boy - back then off contract with Luke Brooks, Aaron Woods and Mitchell Moses - was ordered by coach Ivan Cleary to decide on a contract which, worth about $1 million, was sitting on the desk of his agent Isaac Moses.

Tedesco was issued an ultimatum, a decision which has not only been widely panned since, given he walked, but has also moved the club through six players - or eight if you include contract offers to Latrell Mitchell and Josh Addo-Carr - in an increasingly difficult bid to replace him.

Should Cleary have given Tedesco more time? Regardless, when asked in April, 2017 if he would have stayed were it not for the deadline, Tedesco told Sydney radio station 91.3FM: "Yeah, possibly. Ivan told me and my management that they wanted an answer by Friday that week.

"We both said then we weren't ready to make a decision, (but) he was pretty adamant that he wanted an answer by the end of the week.

"They made it public too, which ... I didn't really think there was a need for that." Worse happened next for the NRL battlers who, suddenly cashed up, paid big to land Josh Reynolds, Moses Mbye, Russell Packer and Chris McQueen - none of which got to the heart of the real problem, which was: When Tedesco sat down with club officials, and was sold on a vision for the future, he couldn't see it. Just as, two years later, Mitchell wouldn't see it either.

Which is no small thing when looking through the prism of $1 million contract offers. But what both wanted, more than anything, was to be part of a genuine premiership contender. Which, coincidentally, brings us back to Laurie.

That rising indigenous talent who isn't so much "The Next Tedesco" as a guy who, only five months ago, was confined to imitating him.

Still, Laurie is indicative of the change now happening inside Tigers HQ. An evolution found, increasingly, in the detail.

Like the fact that the club's four major decision makers - coach Michael Maguire, CEO Justin Pascoe, chairman Lee Hagipantelis, and football manager Adam Hartigan - returned to their same desks this year. For the first time in some time, the Tigers have stability. They have re-signed Dave Nofoaluma, kept Zane Musgrove from St George Illawarra and snared rising New Zealand backrower Tuki Simpkins, while also keeping enough money to chase that next big name.
---
Tighten the belt and secure footy's future

THE NRL's financial position is no longer catastrophic.

A soon-to-be-signed seven-year, $2.3 billion TV broadcast deal is the richest in Australia's sporting history and gives the NRL a wonderful foundation to safeguard its future.

The game now needs a seven-year strategic plan, driven and delivered by Peter V'landys, and long-term investment must be the number one priority.

Combine the annual $330 million payment from Channel 9 and Fox Sports with another $200 million in non--broadcast revenue and the game has a solid base.

The clubs get $206 million (16 x $13 million grants), which takes care of player payments and leaves each franchise $3 million in change before sponsorship, membership, ticket sales, merchandise and leagues club grants. That leaves $324 million for the NRL each year. And this is what needs to happen.

SALARIES Cost-cutting will start right at the top and the next CEO will be on lower than $1 -million.

Recently departed chief executive Todd Greenberg was on $1.2 million plus big bonuses. It was recently revealed the NRL spends $500,000 a day to run the competition with a staff of 400.

V'landys has vowed to slash $50 million a year from these costs. Executive wages have been out of control for too long. The game's senior management team is on a combined $6 million.

The likes of second-in-charge Nick Weeks will no longer be on $900,000.

CLUBS Poker machine revenue is slowly dying and Sydney teams can no longer rely on their licensed clubs. Still, the NRL must not give the clubs more money. It's like drip-feeding cash to a drunk punter.

These clubs have lost and squandered more than $400 million over the past 10 years. We reported recently how the money has been wasted on dozens of coach sackings, overstaffing of football departments, player contract payouts and salary cap scandals.

Like the NRL head office, the clubs need to spend more responsibly and set up sustainable business models.

FOOTBALL DEPARTMENTS Salaries for coaches and their high--performance staff will be substantially reduced. The days of Craig Bellamy and Wayne Bennett getting $1.5 million are numbered. It is simply unaffordable.

Some clubs are now spending up to $8 million to prepare their teams. The NRL will impose a cap of around $4.5 million on football departments.

There will be two assistant coaches instead of three, one less physio and one less in sports science. The extravagance of having full-time dietitians, psychologists and two doctors will go.

PLAYER PAYMENTS Goodbye to Ben Hunt, Ash Taylor, Josh Dugan, Kieran Foran and Anthony Milford-type contracts. The salary cap is now $9.6 million and the RLPA will fight hard for increases each year.

However, there is talk that players will have to take a hit like everyone else. One official told me the cap could come down to as low as $8.5 million next year while the game, like all businesses, slowly recovers from COVID-19. It would require an across-the-board pay cut of 11 per cent.

GRASSROOTS To save money, the responsibility for junior development needs to be taken from the clubs. In some cases, like at the Penrith Panthers, it will save them several million dollars annually.

In the past the NRL, NSWRL and clubs have all employed development -officers in schools and junior league.

Ridiculously, representatives from all three bodies have been covering the same areas. Clubs will be reluctant to lose control of their own juniors but it is the most cost-effective outcome.

In future, this should all be handled by the NSWRL and QRL. All juniors will belong to the game, not the individual clubs.

REFEREES AND BUNKER The NRL employs 25 full-time referees and touch judges.

The Project Apollo committee has -already determined the game will resume on May 28 with only one referee. The full-time squad could drop to as low as a dozen.

There are many cost-saving opportunities for the bunker, including combining operations with other football codes such as the AFL, rugby union and soccer to share the same technology from the same facility. It could save $2 million a year.

INTEGRITY UNIT The integrity unit employs 17 investigators, legal experts and betting analysts. This is another area where cost savings could be significant. Like with the operation of the -bunker, there is talk of setting up a statewide sporting integrity unit to be in charge of all sports in NSW, including cricket, the football codes, boxing or any events on which bookmakers frame markets.

INDEPENDENT COMMISSION Now is the time for a shake-up. To ensure transparency, the 16 clubs should have two representatives on the commission.

There would be no more secrets over finances. Only COVID-19 uncovered the mess we've been in.

Also, the QRL and NSWRL should each have a representative at the table now they have taken full responsibility for grassroots.

STADIUM POLICY The NRL has to finalise a policy on venues and take it to the state government. Maybe even buy or invest in a stadium like Bankwest.

Greenberg always favoured the big stadium rebuilds at Allianz and ANZ, which is fine for Origin, grand finals and blockbusters.

But V'landys is in favour of suburban-ground tribalism, as are the broadcasters, which loathe having a backdrop of tens of thousands of empty seats in a stadium.

The nine Sydney clubs can only survive long term if several of the venues, such as Brookvale Oval, Shark Park, Leichhardt Oval, Campbelltown, Kogarah and Penrith, are upgraded into boutique stadiums or mini Bankwest Stadiums.

INVESTMENT The NRL right now owns nothing.

It recently obtained a $250 million line of credit from UK financiers as an emergency backstop to fight the crippling effect of COVID-19.

V'landys wants to build a war chest. The aim is to bank or invest $70 million a year.That would leave more than half a billion dollars in the bank by the time this next broadcast deal expires in 2027. And it would set the game up for the next 50 years.
---
ROOSTERS recruit Josh Morris says NRL players could be forced back into the workforce following the COVID-19 pandemic, admitting: "Ending up on the tools this year is a very real prospect." With the NRL competition suspended indefinitely, it now appears certain that everyone involved in elite rugby league - including some 480 players - are going to be forced into taking pay cuts.

Speaking on Triple M early yesterday, Morris conceded that with no end date on the code's shutdown, even senior players like himself could be forced back into the workforce.

Quizzed on the impact the game's shutdown could have on players, Morris replied: "For myself, I've played the game long enough to have some money put away.

"But I also have mortgages that I have to pay as well.

"I'm doing a carpentry course at TAFE at the moment and could end up on the tools at the end of the year, it's a very real prospect." Despite starting the year with Cronulla, Morris had only this week switched to the Roosters, where he was preparing for his first game with the Chooks alongside twin brother Brett.

The 33-year-old centre, who boasts six Tests for Australia and 15 Origins with NSW, revealed the shutdown came only hours into his first day at Roosters HQ.

"I had a pretty long day getting to know all the boys," Morris said of his Monday arrival. "Then at 5.30pm last night we had a meeting and got told the season was being suspended.

"We are just waiting on advice from the head and obviously the club to see what to do.

"Like everyone we will probably be in isolation of some sort."Morris also told Triple M that he was particularly concerned for those younger players "living month-to-month on their pay cheque".
---
LET US IN, SUNSHINE: TV STARS & NRL EXECS CHANNEL 9 and the NRL are desperately trying to secure an exemption from the Queensland Government to fly commentators and big wigs into Brisbane for Wednesday's State of Origin -decider.

The Daily Telegraph can reveal the Suncorp Stadium showdown faces being Maroon-washed, with Sydney-based commentators currently banned from entering Queensland.

Desperate to have a Blues presence in the broadcast, Channel 9 is hoping to put the likes of Phil "Gus" Gould, Andrew "Joey" Johns and host Karl Stefanovic on a private jet to Brisbane to bypass Queensland's strict border closure.

Queensland Health refused to comment on Channel 9's moves for an exemption, citing -confidentiality reasons.

"Queensland Health agreed to a plan presented by the NRL that enables the 2020 State of Origin -series to proceed while mitigating the risk of COVID-19," a -spokeswoman said.

The NRL's current travel exemption does not apply to broadcasters or staff that are not part of the State of Origin "bubble", which is required to adhere to strict biosecurity protocols.

That means they must secure another exemption from Queensland's chief health officer Dr Jeannette Young to have any sort of NSW presence in the broadcast.

A Channel 9 spokesman said the network was still finalising plans and could not provide any further detail.

The NRL is hoping to have some senior staff secure an exemption so they can attend the series-deciding contest which will be played in front of 39,000 fans.

The Origin shield is traditionally presented to the winning team after the third game by the NRL's senior management. As part of the plan, all Sydneysiders would return to NSW immediately after the game via private jet to minimise their contact with the Queensland community.

But Dr Young and Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk face being accused of hypocrisy if they allow television and NRL figures into the state given Queensland's strict -border policy.

The government has been under immense pressure to open Queensland's borders in recent months given the low community transmission figures of COVID-19 in NSW. Ms Palaszczuk has insisted Queensland's border policy will not be reviewed until the end of the month. The bulk of the NRL and Channel 9's figures live in the greater Sydney region, which is still regarded as a COVID "hot spot" by the Queensland Government.

Channel 9's broadcast of the second Origin game at ANZ Stadium in Sydney on Wednesday night had little Queensland influence.

Maroons legends Darren Lockyer, Paul Vautin and Johnathan Thurston appeared on the broadcast from a Brisbane studio.

Queensland officials will make a last-ditch bid to increase the capacity at Suncorp Stadium for next week's deciding State of Origin game as they attempt to heap pressure on NSW by turning the venue into a seething cauldron of hate. The Queensland government has approved 75 percent capacity, which means close to 40,000 people will be able to attend Origin III.
---
Apart from being the AFL's best player, 'Dusty' is a marketer's dream for his authenticity and appeal off the park, writes Michael Warner

THE tatts, the trademark mohawk and football genius make Richmond superstar Dustin Martin the most marketable athlete in the country, experts say.

With a "vibe" likened to English football legend David Beckham (right), Dusty is quietly building a multimillion-dollar endorsements empire.

The triple-premiership Tiger has added Archies Footwear to a stable that boasts Bonds underwear, Jeep, Voost vitamins and watchmaker Kennedy Luxury.

Martin, 29, will release his own fitness app and a second book next season, and is closing in on a lucrative new boot and runners contract.

A documentary tracking the rise of the kid from Castlemaine in country Victoria to the top of Australian sport is also due in 2024.

The three-time Norm Smith medallist comes in at No.6 in News Corp's ranking of Australia's 100 most powerful and influential sports industry figures.

UK-based Supernova Entertainment boss Richard Beck, who has worked with Guns N' Roses, INXS and Bruce Springsteen, said Martin was also on the radar of some international advertising agencies.

"Dustin is a super interesting case study of a big fish in a little pond that rightly on merit, deserves to swim in the wider ocean," Beck said.

"I've followed not just his footy career, but the way his management team have brought showbiz acumen and sensibilities to his business and brand.

"He is unique enough of a talent and character to become whatever he wants and attain success previously unheard of.

"Healthy food, lifestyle accessories, cars, tech, sports products, you name it. They are all about to open up to him. He's that marketable." Martin's agent Ralph Carr said he believed his client was "not only one of the best players that has ever played the game, he is probably the most bankable sports brand in Australia".

"Our research shows he has one of the most recognisable faces in the country and he is strong in all states, which is extraordinary," Carr said. "I always thought with the right support and guidance he would become Australia's Michael Jordan or David Beckham.

"Brands need athletes just as much as athletes need brands. When they're paired together by the magic of sports endorsement deals, both can make big money.

"Many people get inspired by athletes and end up doing great things on their own, and inspiration is not something which can be priced." Emily Small, general manager of brands at Hanes Brands Australasia (owner of Bonds), said the company's partnership is "not just with Dustin the athlete, more the original and unique man he is off the field".

"Dustin likes to collaborate and is always fully engaged whether it be a trick shot, photo shoots (right) or running through Melbourne's streets in his undies," Small said.

Martin, who also has investments in property, is contracted to Richmond until the end of 2024 on a deal worth about $1.3 million a season.

Melbourne marketing expert John Tripodi, of Twenty3 Sport & Entertainment, said "there are a few dynamics at play which allow the likes of Dustin Martin to rise above the clutter".

"First, it helps when you're arguably the best player in the competition," Tripodi said. "The AFL is dominated by private school-educated footballers and Dusty represents a different narrative. He has his own backstory which provides some colour at times, but also gives him an authenticity which resonates with fans and sponsoring brands. Some may call this an 'X-factor'."

Dusty Inc.

Dustin Martin's endorsements: ■ Bonds ■ Jeep ■ Voost ■ Kennedy Luxury ■ Archies Footwear

In the works: ■ Documentary (due 2024) ■ Fitness app (2021) ■ Boot and runners deal ■ Book II (2021)

10 James Warburton Age: 50 Seven West Media chief executive Source of power: The man in charge of the free-to-air broadcast rights for AFL and international cricket flexed his muscle over winter by negotiating heavily reduced deals with both codes. While an overwhelming majority of AFL fans say they want a traditional 2.30pm Grand Final - after this year's COVID-enforced experiment at the Gabba - Warburton and co will have the biggest say on whether the thirst for ratings wins out and the AFL permanently shifts to a twilight or night-time decider. The network has publicly savaged Cricket Australia over its Test, one-day and Big Bash scheduling and the success of this summer could have dramatic ramifications on the future of Australia's national sport. The early departure of Indian superstar Virat Kohli won't help. WARNER

9 Wayne Bennett Age: 70 NRL coach Source of power: Written off as a past-his-prime geriatric after a COVID-19 breach where he claimed to have been confused by the NRL's quarantine rules, Bennett confirmed himself as a coaching genius when he masterminded the biggest shock in State of Origin history. Queensland's giant-killing 2020 series win over NSW is the latest triumph in a career that has produced seven premiership crowns with two separate clubs. The 70-year-old has huge influence across rugby league, with his advice sought for major decisions in the game. PHELPS

8 Patrick Delany Foxtel chief executive Source of power: During a seven-year stint as boss of Fox Sports, which ended in 2018 when he became CEO of the Foxtel Group, Delany was the driving force behind the reshaping of Australia's sports broadcast landscape, a key figure behind every major sports deal over the past 10 years. He oversaw the introduction of Fox Footy and Fox League and helped create the Big Bash League in partnership with Cricket Australia in 2011. Delany changed the look of Fox Sports, endorsed magazine shows that humanised and broadened interest in codes, and helped to bring almost every major sport in Australia to Fox despite plenty of spirited rights negotiations that were never as routine as they sounded. A lively public speaker, he encouraged his commentators to have a crack, once saying at a season launch: "If I am going to put a microphone in front of you, I want you to say something." More recently he was the key architect of the Kayo streaming service, a digital disruption of Foxtel that now has huge popular traction with a new generation of sports fans that never had Foxtel. CRADDOCK

7 Michael Miller Age: 51 News Corp Australia executive chairman Source of power: Raised in the Hunter Valley, Miller's first love of media started as a boy reading sports results in The Muswellbrook Chronicle. Decades later he is the man with a big say in Australia over News Corp's digital, publishing and broadcast sporting empire. His influence stretches to all corners of the sporting spectrum - from being a shadow across the negotiating table when Fox Sports won the cricket rights in 2018, to one-on-one discussions with Wayne Bennett in his tumultuous final days as Broncos coach, to reassuring country readers that a switch from paper to digital publication would enhance rather than tarnish their local sport coverage. Renowned for his measured demeanour, Miller's role at News Corp is much broader than sport but sport remains a key part of it and no major decision is made without passing his desk. He has sat on boards ranging from realestate.com.au to Waratahs Rugby.

CRADDOCK

6 Dustin Martin Age: 29 Richmond AFL star Source of power: The biggest name in Australian domestic sport and the closest thing we've had to English soccer legend David Beckham, minus the pop star wife. Kids want to play like him, grown drunk men adopt his haircut, sponsors clamour to sign him and every rival club wishes he wore their jumper. Not many footballers of any code get to sip cocktails in the Maldives with Serena Williams or to leave their car in the MCG basement carpark for weeks after yet another premiership salute. Three flags and three Norm Smith Medals stamp him as arguably the greatest AFL finals player in history and at 29 there's plenty of top-end footy left in Dusty. Turns heads in the NRL states and helped Richmond break a 37-year run of misery to become the biggest sporting club in the land with more than 100,000 members. WARNER

5 Sam Kerr Age: 27 Australian women's soccer captain With admirers stretching from Serena Williams down to young fans - including boys - seen wearing her jersey, the Matildas captain's rise has embodied the spectacular surge of women's sport in Australia. With her incredible skillset and multicultural background, she represents many parts of Australia and has taken women's soccer to a level of popularity that was unthinkable even a decade ago. Her backflip goalscoring celebrations have both showcased her star quality and freakish athleticism which last year saw her voted one of the best female soccer players in the world. She has just signed a deal to do six children's books claiming she wanted to inspire Australian kids to chase their dreams. CRADDOCK

4 Gillon McLachlan Age: 47 AFL chief executive Source of power: Polo playing, racehorse-owning boss of Australia's biggest domestic sport - the code that draws the largest crowds and pockets the richest broadcast deals. Navigated the game through the COVID crisis, a task made harder by the emergency exodus of 10 teams from the Victorian heartland and the added complication of negotiating border control rules with six different states. As the biggest code with the most to lose, McLachlan oversaw the league's response to the financial crisis, reducing what loomed as a potential $1b hit into an estimated $100m loss, notwithstanding savage cost and job cuts. Struck a deal with the Queensland government on the eve of a state election that saved the season. The arrival of Peter V'landys has been a game changer in the code wars and his rugby league counterpart read the play better, boldly restarting his competition two weeks earlier and locking away an extended pay-TV deal with Foxtel. Entering his seventh season in the hot seat, McLachlan's remains the most visible figure in Australian rules.

WARNER

3 Tim Paine Age: 35 Australian Test cricket captain Source of power: The most unexpected saviour in Australian sporting history. Became Australian captain midway through the ball-tampering Test in Cape Town and his sturdy temperament guided his ship through this nation's greatest cricket controversy. When Australian cricket was wobbling on its moral axis two summers ago in a losing series against India he was the lone cool head among team bosses. His rousing yet composed dressing-room speech to an Australian team that lost a Test due to a Ben Stokes 'miracle' at Headingley last year was one of the finest by an Australian captain and his team duly rebounded to retain the Ashes. Australia owes him much. Selectors had traditionally thought keepers should not be made captains due to their high work level but they had little choice when appointing Paine and he has handled the two roles exceptionally well. CRADDOCK

2 John Coates Age: 70 Australian Olympic Committee president and International Olympic Committee vice-president Source of power: No Australian wields as much influence on global sport as Coates. As the second-highest ranking official in the Olympic movement, Coates has the power to persuade sport's most powerful executives and captains of industry, as well as major political leaders and even members of royal families. A lawyer by profession, Coates is also the president of the Court of Arbitration for Sport and has a knack for getting his wishes. It was Coates who made the inspired decision to pick Cathy Freeman to light the cauldron at the 2000 Sydney Olympics. He's a mover and shaker on a stack of high-powered committees, including the bid team to bring the Rugby World Cup back to Australia in 2027. But his biggest goal right now is to ensure Brisbane wins the hosting rights for the 2032 Olympics and Paralympics. If the world's biggest multi-sports event comes back, you can bet it'll all be down to the power of Coates. LINDEN

TOP 100 FULL LIST Part I: 100-21 (published yesterday) 100 Andrew Bogut 99Dave Rennie 98Annastacia Palaszczuk 97 Matt Rose 96Nick Hockley 95 Peter Gordon 94Cathy Freeman 93Josephine Sukkar 92Larry Kestelman 91Kitty Chiller 90Peggy O'Neal 89Steve Gillis 88James Cummings 87Marne Fechner 86Liz Cambage 85Daniel Ricciardo 84Jamie Kah 83Sam Ayoub 82Paul Marsh 81Tony Cochrane 80Arthur Laundy 79Michael Hooper 78Paul Connors 77Mack Horton 76Andrew Pridham 75Ricky Stuart 74Trevor Hohns 73Jamie Whincup 72Russell Crowe 71Dylan Alcott 70 Adam Goodes 69Adam Scott 68Craig Kelly 67Patty Mills 66 Cate Campbell 65 Craig Bellamy 64Tim Tszyu 63Chris Waller 62Dave Trodden 61 Mark Skaife 60Brad Fittler 59Megan Davis 58Ben Simmons 57Pat Cummins 56Greg Alexander 55 Trevor Nisbett 54Clint Newton 53Amanda Elliott 52Matthew Tripp 51James Johnson 50 Lynne Anderson 49David Sharpe 48 Buddy Franklin 47Wayne Pearce 46Lloyd Williams 45Jeff Kennett 44 Ryan Story 43Jane Fernandez 42Steve Hocking 41Mal Meninga 40Curtis McGrath 39Rob Clarke 38Matt Carroll 37 Steve Crawley 36Alastair Clarkson 35Shane Warne 34 Phil Gould 33 Eddie McGuire 32Cameron Smith 31Ricky Ponting 30Nick Politis 29Tayla Harris 28 Roland Dane 27 Hamish McLennan 26Latrell Mitchell 25 Richard Goyder 24Ellyse Perry 23 Kerry Stokes 22Steve Smith 21John Messara
---
SAINT JAKE Friend's comeback to win three premierships and captain the Roosters after being deregistered and having his contract torn up in 2009 is one of the game's most inspiring stories. This guy should be employed in the NRL welfare department.

He should tell his tale to every youngster in the game that you can stuff up in life but still make the most of a second chance.

SINNER SHARKS/Newtown prop Andrew Fifita floored Canberra five-eighth Matt Frawley with a vicious high shot in Canterbury Cup last week. Somehow the NSWRL judiciary decided it was only a grade-one dangerous contact. He misses ZERO games. In the NRL he would have copped a minimum four weeks.

SHOOSH THE NRL remains fully committed to introducing a 17th team in Brisbane for 2023 despite constant talk there aren't enough quality players for an extra team. There is more concern at NRL headquarters about the AFL's growth in Brisbane in TV ratings and participation since the city hosted the 2020 AFL finals during the COVID-19 crisis.

SPOTTED Warring footy bosses Peter V'landys and Gil McLachlan finally came face to face at Randwick yesterday at The Championships ... and it wasn't in the carpark. McLachlan was there as a guest of NSW stadiums boss and GWS chairman Tony Shepherd. The pair eventually saw eye to eye but only when V'landys jumped on a chair.

SPOTTED DON'T worry about James Tedesco v Ryan Papenhuyzen when Melbourne Storm play the Sydney Roosters next weekend. The best storyline is Coach Cronk v Consultant Cronk. What will he tell Sam Walker about Jahrome Hughes? And what will he tell Hughes about Walker?

SPOTTED PENRITH and Queensland Origin star Kurt Capewell among a huge cheer squad from Ipswich to watch 18-year-old Sam Walker's debut at the SCG last week.

SPOTTED WHAT a difference 12 months can make on a healthy diet and good exercise plan. Radio 2GB broadcaster Ray Hadley looks 100 in the photo on the left before the benefits of a better lifestyle kicked in. Hadley has lost 20kg and his belt size has shrunk from 42 to 34.
---
No visit to virus hotspot for WHO COVID probe

A WORLD Health Organisation team investigating the origins of COVID-19 in China failed to visit Wuhan, sparking fears the whims of Beijing are being prioritised over independent science.

Two WHO representatives tasked with laying the groundwork for a larger team of international experts to investigate the zoonotic source of the virus spent three weeks in China this month without stepping foot in the city widely considered ground zero of the pandemic.

The glaring omission has fuelled concern the Chinese Government could thwart any attempt at a truly impartial inquiry into COVID-19.

Liberal MP and former Ambassador to Israel Dave Sharma said he was "alarmed" the team spent so much time in China but did not visit Wuhan, the "origin of the outbreak" and the home of the Wuhan Institute of Virology: "If this investigation is to help prevent future pandemics, it must be independent and enjoy unfettered access. The WHO needs to put the public health interest of the world before the sensitivities of any particular nation." The WHO's investigation into the animal source of the coronavirus was one component of a resolution backed by Australia at the World Health Assembly earlier this year.

WHO spokesman Christian Lindmeier said the team sent to China for preliminary investigations did speak with Wuhan scientists via video. "The team had extensive discussions with Chinese counterparts and received updates on epidemiological studies, biologic and genetic analysis and animal health research," he said.

But the Financial Times has reported a senior US official has raised serious concerns about the lack of access to Wuhan during the August trip. "The WHO delegation sat in Beijing for three weeks and got nowhere near Wuhan," the official reportedly said.
---
Company director Charles Fairfax and his wife, Kate have bought their COVID-19 retreat, Balquhain at Blackheath. The historic Blue Mountains home was the little used weekender of the fund manager Alwyn Heong and his partner Ian Newtown.

While not one of the treasured colonial homes of the media family, Balquhain was briefly owned by Charles's uncle John B. Fairfax for a decade from 1980, and the venue of many family tennis parties.

Michael Pallier at -Sotheby's International, along with local agent Brenden Purcell, are understood to have -secured higher than its initial $3.8 million hopes, after just a week on the market. The Dover Heights based Fairfax (inset) spotted the advertisement in the Wentworth Courier. Balquhain last sold for $2.3 million in 2011, after three years on the market.

The heritage-listed 1890s home was built by the grazier, Malcolm Campbell as a holiday home from his base, St Helliers near Muswellbrook.  It was then owned by the Leslie family whose origins were back in Scotland, where they owned the tower of Balquhain near Aberdeen. They bequeathed the home to be used as a rest centre for Presbyterian ministers, with the church selling for $76,000 in 1980 to the Fairfax family who onsold it in 1990 for $675,000. Heong resides at Headingley House, the Georgian Woollahra home bought for $13 million in 2013 from John Spender QC then making the move from the Rose Bay trophy home Indah which Pallier secured a $27.08 million in 2015.

With retreats away from the city attracting increased attention due to the pan-demic, strong interest is also expected for Sentry Rock, the Hawkesbury River ranch style retreat listed by Louise Cordina, who runs Cordina Farms, and her horseman husband Glenn North.

It was built at Spencer by the late stockbroker Rene Rivkin in a rustic style and then expanded by Bob and Wendy Lapointe who paid $1.9 million in 2005. Cordina and North paid $4.5 million in 2017 for the 4ha retreat that has $10 million plus hopes through Trent Iverson of Harris Iverson Real Estate. Rivkin would either fly or boat to the riverfront some 60km northwest of Sydney.
---
THE NRL and the RLPA are about $25 million apart when it comes to cost-cutting measures for the next three years.

Discussions between the two parties are ongoing and include a potential roster cull. The salary cap could drop by about 5 per cent but cost savings are being explored in other areas including injury hardship, marketing and representative payments. While the NRL and the RLPA have agreed to a reduced cap for this year, there could be further cuts in 2020 including how much players will be paid to play Origin.

Clubs are also expecting roster squads to be cut to 28 next year. There have been discussions around keeping up to four development players or the potential for reintroducing a second-tier salary cap.

The NRL and the RLPA are hopeful of having the situation cleared up next week. Clubs were also told they need to be flexible as the COVID-19 situation worsens in Victoria and Queensland. The prospect of moving the four Queensland-based teams to NSW was raised.

Club bosses also told interim NRL chief executive Andrew Abdo to scuttle any plans for a hybrid match between the Kangaroos and the All Black at season's end.

Several club bosses raised their concerns during the phone hook-up, clearly getting their point across that there is no appetite for the match in club-land. One club boss said: "Rugby need it more than us, so why would we even contemplate it?"
---
WHO TAKES CHINA'S SIDE IN HASTY COVID INQUIRY

THE World Health Organisation's hurried report into the origins of the coronavirus was slammed as an "unsatisfactory" whitewash designed to protect the Chinese government from embarrassment, just hours after handing down its findings.

Speaking in China on Tuesday night, WHO investigators dismissed the possibility that the virus may have escaped from the controversial Wuhan Institute of Vir-ology while leaving the door open to the possibility that the virus may have been imported from another country.

Peter Embarek, one of the scientists who made up the delegation, said finding the origin of COVID was a "work in progress".

But he said COVID-19 most likely made the jump to humans through an unknown animal source.

The theory that the virus may have escaped from a local lab where scientists were known to be conducting "gain of function" tests on -viruses similar to the coronavirus was dismissed out of hand as "extremely unlikely", according to Embarek.

But more needs to be known before the possibility can be dismissed, according to a number of scientists and experts critical of China's handling of the pandemic.

"It's unsatisfactory, dismissing possibilities without providing evidence for why," said vaccine researcher Prof Nikolai Petrovski, who is the Director of Endocrinology at Flinders University Medical Centre in South Australia.

"They seem to have signed up to the Chinese government's position, which is that this didn't come from China, and that it might have come in to China on frozen food packaging. Why are they -saying that and what is the evidence?" "We are entitled to the facts they are using to dismiss different possibilities, and to know if they have dealt with the question marks around how the virus got this feature or that feature." Others were similarly sceptical.

"The WHO mission is compromised because Beijing is choreographing the team's visit. And the delegation -includes some China apologists," academic and author Clive Hamilton, who has written a number of books detailing the efforts of the Chinese Communist Party to subvert democracy in Australia and around the world, told The Daily Telegraph.

"It already looks like the WHO delegation is following Beijing's script." UNSW Professor Raina MacIntyre also said it was "expected" the WHO investigators would rule out the lab as where COVID-19 started, but that didn't mean it was the case.

"They do not provide any evidence for dismissing a lab leak," she said. Since the beginning of the pandemic, the Chinese government has tightly controlled information about the virus that could be embarrassing to the authoritarian regime, and suggested the virus might have been brought to Wuhan by visiting American military athletes or even on the surface of imported frozen food packaging.

China has also sought to punish Australian exporters by imposing billions of dollars worth of trade sanctions in retaliation for the Morrison government's pressing for an investigation into the -pandemic.

Nationals Senator Matt Canavan lashed the process, suggesting that any report into the virus delivered on Chinese soil was immediately compromised.

"It's a bit hard to believe the conclusions of this report when if the WHO had made certain findings, they may have been detained before -getting out of the country," he said.

"If journalists expressing views aren't safe in China, how can you expect health officials to be safe either?" Other Coalition MPs were just as scathing, with one -telling The Daily Telegraph it was "premature" to rule out the lab hypothesis "before they have found clear evidence of an alternative cause".

From the start, the WHO's investigation has been marred by controversy, with the Chinese government first delaying authorisation for the visit, and then tightly man-aging access for the inter-national delegation.

Despite the WHO's report, the theory that COVID-19's origins lie behind the gates of the secretive Wuhan Institute of Virology have gained currency in -recent days after being widely rubbished as a Donald Trump-style conspiracy theory when The Daily Telegraph reported on it last year.  Last week, the Washington Post published a blistering editorial saying that "the possibility of a laboratory -accident or leak … must be -investigated ... Wuhan (has) at least six facilities with BSL-3 laboratories for handling infectious agents," the paper's editorial board wrote.

And, soon after the WHO handed down its report, former US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo told Fox News in an interview: "I continue to know that there was significant evidence that this may well have come from that -laboratory."

5 years Length of Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sex Abuse 10 months Length of Warren Commission investigation into JFK's assassination 12 days World Health Organisation on-ground team's investigation into the origins of COVID-19 pandemic
---
AUSTRALIAN sport has rediscovered its voice. A voice that roars and booms and wails and exalts and tells the ref his eyes appear to be painted on. How we have missed that voice in the year that emptied the grandstands.

It's the human equivalent of birdsong. Let's call it crowdsong. Crowdsong returned on Wednesday night when a capacity chorus of 52,500 supporters were allowed to pull up a pew and grab a brew for the deciding State of Origin match between Queensland and NSW.

It was the first full house in Australia since COVID-19 hit sport for six in March.

The sort of spine-tingling, fist-shaking, foot-stomping full-throated crowdsong not witnessed since Alyssa Healy belted a half-century and Australia's wonderful women cricketers won the T20 World Cup in front of a near--maximum throng of 86,174 at the MCG in March.

Origin isn't Origin without the patrons. Hear, hear. The swarming mass of purists, pissheads, diehards and dandies. Origin at Suncorp - the greatest cathedral in league - would not have been Origin at Suncorp if the seats were unattended.

Politicians normally get booed at sporting events but after Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk became the first state leader to allow the glorious Full House sign to go up, she was more likely to get the Wally Lewis Medal for the most valuable contribution to the series.

She seems quite the footy head. After she stopped ignoring NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian just long enough to text "Queenslander" after the Maroons' victory in Origin I.

Announcing the green light for a maximum crowd, she even referred to Suncorp as "the cauldron".

It was estimated 2200 of the 52,500 seats were to be filled by folks from NSW. It was a wonder Palaszczuk let that many in. The AFL grand final at the 'Gabba in Brisbane was restricted to 29,707.

There was the sense of something missing … that something was the crowdsong. The NRL grand final at ANZ Stadium in Sydney was kept to 37,303. It was still missing … the crowdsong. The Melbourne Cup had an official crowd figure of zero.

Not only was Origin III the biggest crowd in Australian sport since COVID-19, it was the biggest in the world.

Crowdsong had been so sorely missed that television broadcasts developed fake cheering. Footage from the NBA basketball finals in America had fake fans. A virtual Barack Obama, for instance, was in the stands. On Wednesday night in Brisbane, real people were back … and so was something elemental to a grand sporting occasion. The crowdsong.
---
HUNT FOR THE CURE GERM detectives and scientists have uncovered genetic mutations in coronavirus clusters circulating throughout Australia, giving them a chance to move a step ahead of the disease.

The breakthrough by Doherty Institute scientists and Victorian Department of Health contact tracers is vital to limiting the spread of community transmission of COVID-19.

By tracking the different mutations, specialists cannot just pinpoint the country a person's individual coronavirus infection originated from, but can also home in on the hospital, aged care centre, cruise or other local source they are linked to.

Armed with the new genomic sequencing, Associate Professor Deborah Williamson said contact tracers around Australia could identify everyone likely to be linked to a cluster, even if they did not have symptoms.

The genetic information also provides a clue as to where each cluster is likely to spread next, allowing more targeted isolation to stop each COVID-19 outbreak - which is needed to ease wider restrictions on the entire population.

"We are seeing clusters related to different outbreaks in different parts of the world," Assoc Prof Williamson said.

"The benefits are going to be in monitoring things like outbreaks in hospitals, outbreaks in aged care facilities, and looking at potential community transmission.

"If we did find there was an outbreak in a certain part of the community, then they could direct resources to that such as contact tracing, testing of those in that risk network." The Melbourne-based Doherty Institute is at the forefront of global efforts to find a COVID-19 cure. While its genomic sequencing will not overcome the virus, combining the information with the epidemiological work of contact tracers could be a key to restoring freedoms.

The findings are also being shared with scientists around the world to further research, as well as to increase the data available to Australian trace detectives. After identifying subtle differences hidden among the 30,000 characters in the genetic code of two coronavirus clusters circulating in Victoria, contact tracing detectives have already used the genomic sequencing technique to stop each spreading in recent weeks.

The Institute's scientists have now pored over samples from hundreds of COVID-19 patients to genetically sequence each person's infection, identifying telltale mutations in coronavirus imported from each country.

Despite the slowing curve, Australia's COVID-19 peak is still possibly ahead and Assoc Prof Williamson said it was vital all states began collecting samples to build up a complete set of sequencing before community transmission took off.

With a full set of sequencing data, any new cases emerging in the community could be instantly traced back to their origins to identify others unknowingly caught up in the cluster, or those who are about to be if they are not isolated.

"It's no good sequencing a few genomes just from one hospital, or from one outbreak. To get a proper handle on what's going on we need to be sequencing all of the genomes not just in Victoria, but in all of Australia," Assoc Prof Williamson said.

While genome sequencing has been used in Victoria to trace the source and get ahead of well-established infectious diseases such as salmonella and tuberculosis for the past five years, identifying COVID-19 mutations has been much more difficult for scientists around the globe.

Because the novel coronavirus only emerged four months ago its mutations have not had long to separate to a point where they are easily distinguishable.

But using powerful computers to overlay hundreds of samples from COVID-19 patients highlighted the smallest differences in the nucleotides of the RNA genome in patients already known to belong to certain clusters, providing a framework to identify related cases.

The COVID-19 mutations identified so far are not thought to provide an indication of the severity of each strain, but Assoc Prof Williamson said work was continuing to identify more differences as well as their role.

"It's easy to forget that four-and-a-half months ago we didn't even know this thing existed," she said.

"We are trying to cram years of expertise and knowledge into a few short months. "Every day we are learning something new about not just a virus, but ways to detect the virus, ways to control the outbreak."

NATIONAL COVID-19 HOT SPOTS WHERE GENOME MUTATION TRACKING COULD STOP THE SPREAD

QUEENSLAND ■North Brisbane 309 ■South Brisbane 239 ■Gold Coast 188 ■Sunshine Coast 89

NSW ■Blacktown 106 ■Byron Bay 16 ■Cumberland 66 ■Tamworth 12 ■Sydney Eastern Suburbs 261 ■Penrith10 ■Lake Macquarie 54 ■Ryde 66

ACT ■Tuggeranong 23 ■South Canberra 17 ■Gungahlin 17

TASMANIA ■North West Tasmania 97

VICTORIA ■Stonnington 87 ■Banyule 82 ■Greater Geelong 62 ■Melbourne 61

SOUTH AUSTRALIA ■Barossa Valley 40 ■Adelaide Airport 34

WESTERN AUSTRALIA ■Greater Perth region 403 ■Broome 11 ■Albany 7 ■Kalgoorlie 6 ■Halls Creek 4

DEFINITION The case definition of a confirmed case is a person who tests positive to a validated specific SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid test or has the virus identified by electron microscopy or viral culture, at a reference laboratory. The details on source of infection are subject to change as public health investigations and case interviews are ongoing.

GENOMICSGenomics is the study of whole genomes of organisms. It analyses the building blocks of cells such as DNA and RNA through sequencing to decode the fundamental structure and function of genomes. Genomic research has already been used to develop better understanding, tracking and defences against bacteria and viruses including meningococcal disease, salmonella, tuberculosis and cytomegalovirus, a member of the herpes family. Decoding can reveal mutations and allow scientists to act quickly to identify and isolate the source of the disease.
---
Here's how some of game's biggest names moved away from the coaching cauldron GARTH BRENNAN ■ Gold Coast (2018-19) ■ Win record:30% Axed after 12 wins from 40 games following a review by Gold Coast head of performance and culture Mal Meninga. Brennan dusted himself off to secure work at the NRL, reviewing the performance of referees at the beginning of this year before he was a victim of the COVID-19 crisis that led to job cuts. The 48-year-old returned home to Newcastle where he's a budding real estate agent and property investor.

BRIAN SMITH ■ Illawarra (1984-87), St George (1991-95), Parramatta (1997-2006), Newcastle (2007-09), Roosters (2010-12) ■ Win record: 52.7% Sacked with a year remaining on his contract at the end of 2012 by the Roosters, Smith spent 36 years in the game as a coach. He was general manager of the Warriors for two years, with the 66-year-old let go last November. He has been working in his spare time as an Uber driver in Brisbane.

ANTHONY GRIFFIN ■ Brisbane (2011-14), Penrith (2016-18) ■ Win record: 55.5% Controversially sacked at Penrith just four weeks out from the 2018 finals. The 53-year-old remains hungry to succeed in the NRL and the Cowboys are believed to be impressed with his interview last week as he vies to take over from Paul Green. Offers mentoring and one-on-one coaching to business leaders. Also a member of 2GB's Continuous Call Team.

IVAN HENJAK ■ Brisbane (2009-10) ■ Win record: 52.9% 'Where's Wally' is easier to find than the former Broncos coach. Not even senior members of Brisbane management have heard from Henjak in years. The 57-year-old was axed three weeks before the start of the 2011 season. From the glamour of coaching one of Australia's biggest clubs, Henjak filled his time laying artificial turf, selling beds and coaching the Sunshine Coast Falcons in 2014 - only to quit 10 games into the season.

GEOFF TOOVEY ■ Manly (2012-15) ■ Win record: 58.1% Has made no secret of his desire to continue NRL coaching, having applied for the Warriors job this year. 'Tooves" is an astute judge of football having coached Manly to the 2013 grand final and making regular appearances on Fox League. Every other day, he catches the bus from Sydney's Northern Beaches into the city to work as a chartered accountant.

MATTHEW ELLIOTT ■ Canberra (2002-06), Penrith (2007-11), Warriors (2013-14) ■ Win record: 45.7% Mentored world surfing champion Mick Fanning while coaching in the NRL and it's in the area of mental focus, health and wellbeing that Elliott continues to apply his skill set. Alongside former NRL players Anthony Minichiello and Mark Hughes, Elliott works for The Change Room, which delivers live webinars for participants to manage their health and wellbeing remotely. He is also a member of the commentary team for ABC Grandstand.

BRIAN McCLENNAN ■ Warriors (2012) ■ Win record: 36.4% McClennan coached the Hibiscus Raiders in Auckland's Fox Memorial premiership last year but, following his elderly father Mike's disappearance and death last year, decided he would retire from coaching. Together with his family, 'Bluey' devotes much of his time to supporting Dementia Auckland. He also runs Kaspa Transmissions, a transmissions repair business, outside of Auckland.

KEVIN MOORE ■Canterbury (2009-11) ■Win record: 53% Cut by the Bulldogs midway through the 2011 season, Moore teamed up with brother-in-law and former Canterbury coach Chris Anderson to create a recruitment company, Anderson Recruitment and Training, where he's business development manager.

NEIL HENRY ■ Canberra (2007-08), North Queensland (2009-13), Gold Coast (2014-17) ■ Win record: 43.5% Current head coach of the Junior Kangaroos. Outside of coaching the best under-23 players in the country, Henry is a consultant to the NRL focusing on player development, while he also sits on the board of the newly formed coaches' union, the Rugby League Coaches Association.

PHIL ECONOMIDIS ■ Gold Coast (1996-98) ■ Win record: 31.3% He famously led the ragtag Gold Coast Chargers to the 1997 ARL finals, a remarkable achievement given the side was assembled from discards from rival clubs. In March, Economidis, 67, was set to be appointed as head coach of Red Star Belgrade, a Serbian footy club seeking entry into the English Super League's Challenge Cup, until COVID-19 forced the pause of the competition.

STUART RAPER ■ Cronulla (2004-06) ■ Win record: 42.5% Raper and wife Cathy bought a formal wear hire company, Formal Wear 2 Suit U, only a month before he was let go by Cronulla. The company is thriving today. Raper's main line of work is for the NSWRL as referee high performance manager, overseeing grade and junior representative squads.

ROYCE SIMMONS ■ Penrith (1994-2001) ■ Win record: 41.8% Living proof that your character will always be your greatest selling-point. Simmons has worked with the Panthers sponsorship and corporate hospitality team since he finished coaching in 2012. He can host up to 60 events a year for Penrith's major sponsors.

MARK MURRAY ■ Roosters (1991-94), Melbourne (2001-02) ■ Win record: 41.9% A qualified teacher, the former Queensland State of Origin, Roosters and Melbourne coach is now in his sixth year as a real estate agent. Murray spends his weekend's selling $1 million homes for Waterfront Properties Redcliffe in Brisbane.

PETER SHARP ■ Manly (1999), Northern Eagles (2000-02), Manly (2003), Cronulla (2013-14) ■ Win record: 37.6% The former Manly and Northern Eagles head coach and Cronulla interim coach joined Parramatta, where he had worked as an assistant coach on three separate occasions, in 2014 as their list manager, a role he's still in.

JASON TAYLOR ■ Parramatta (2006), South Sydney (2007-09), Wests Tigers (2015-17) ■ Win record: 43.6% From his acrimonious departure at the Tigers, 'JT' secured an assistant role at the Roosters in 2017, before taking over as head coach of NSW Cup feeder club North Sydney in 2018. He's contracted to the Bears until the end of 2021 and works one-on-one with the Roosters' goalkickers, including Kyle Flanagan.

DANIEL ANDERSON ■ Warriors (2001-04), Parramatta (2009-10) ■ Win record: 52.8% Had grand final appearances with Parramatta and the Warriors before winning a premiership with St Helens in the UK. He coached the Kiwi Test team before overseeing the NRL's referees in 2012. A move back to the Eels in 2013 as their GM of football would prove tumultuous, resulting in a two-year ban from the game for his role in the Eels' 2016 salary cap scandal. Currently head of recruitment at the Roosters.

JOHN LANG ■ Cronulla (1994-2001), Penrith (2002-06), South Sydney (2010-11) ■ Win record: 53.8% Had a major impact on the Sharks' consistent finals appearances, including the 1997 Super League grand final. The last coach to lead Penrith to a premiership in 2003. Happily retired, the 69-year-old now lives on the Gold Coast.

PAUL LANGMACK ■South Sydney (2003-04) ■Win record: 14.3% Sacked in his second season during a tough time for Souths in 2004. After a stint with Sportsbet as state sales manager, the 55-year-old has been with the NSWRL since 2012, as corporate events manager, offering Blues' sponsors the VIP treatment at Origin time.

DAVID WAITE ■Newcastle (1991-94), St George (1996-98), St George-Illawarra (1999-2000) ■Win record: 51.6% The 1996 Dally M coach of the year took St George to the 1996 grand final and the merged St George Illawarra to the 1999 grand final. Waite was then controversially replaced by Andrew Farrar halfway through the 2000 season. Had stints with the Great Britain rugby league team as coaching director from 2001-03, as the head coach of Catalans for five games in 2006, before returning as an assistant in 2014. These days, he's providing tutelage to junior rugby league coaches at Runaway Bay in Queensland.

ARTHUR KITINAS ■ South Sydney (2004) ■ Win record: 23.1% Took over his father's tyre shop in Marrickville after leaving Souths, where he works today. Kitinas is still in the game as a development coach for the Roosters' Harold Matthews and SG Ball sides.
---
QUEENSLAND coach Kevin Walters has backed plans for Suncorp Stadium to retain one State of Origin match this season as a tribute to Maroons Immortal Arthur Beetson.

The "Project Artie" campaign is in full swing, with ARL Commission chairman Peter V'landys revealing his desire to reward Queensland fans with a Suncorp game to celebrate Origin's 40-year anniversary.

The Queensland Rugby League has held talks with Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk to gauge the possibility of border restrictions being eased in the coming months to pave the way for an Origin celebration on Beetson's home turf.

The coronavirus pandemic has wreaked havoc with Origin's June-July scheduling and the Maroons were bracing for the prospect of playing all three interstate games against NSW in Sydney this season.

But the NRL's Project Apollo team is keen not to rob Queensland of an Origin game and Walters, who was 12 when he watched Beetson's famous Maroons debut in 1980, is relishing a Suncorp celebration.

"It's the 40th anniversary of Origin and what the great Artie Beetson did for Queensland will never be forgotten," Walters said.

"If we have to play three Origin games in NSW we would do that, but it would be wonderful to have one game in Queensland for everything Artie Beetson achieved." Game three at Suncorp this year was slated for July 8 - the night of Origin's debut at Lang Park in 1980 - but the ARLC is now considering an October series in the hope the COVID-19 crisis will ease to allow crowds to attend.

QRL chairman Bruce Hatcher sees merit in an Origin series after this year's NRL grand final."If it weren't possible to play it in the first six to eight weeks, then I'd look to play it in October or November and I'd love to play at least one game in Queensland," Hatcher said.
---
China infected the world, but some bureaucrats and media think the US is the real threat

The left-wing media is trying to paint the picture of a greatly divergent position between the United States administration and the Australian government on the outbreak of the coronavirus.

While those sentiments may exist within some elements of the Australian bureaucracy, the reality is Scott Morrison and Mike Pompeo have the same view of China's culpability for the outbreak of COVID-19.

The two men are very close, sharing many of the same values and beliefs. Whether or not the virus was created or leaked in a laboratory is a legitimate line of inquiry.

It's why the Office of the Director of National Intelligence issued a rare statement to confirm intelligence networks are investigating it.

Early evidence to the Morrison government didn't just claim that the virus accidentally leaked from a laboratory but that it may have been created there. This has now been ruled out.

But this entire matter of the origins of the virus is a side-show. It distracts from what we do know. And that is that China deliberately chose to hide or destroy evidence of the virus and instead allow hundreds of thousands of people to die all around the world.

It is an understatement to talk about western blood on the hands of President Xi Jinping and Chinese authorities.

Yet, so many are resisting an investigation into China's actions. Into how China destroyed evidence at genomics laboratories and in the wet market.

Into the disappearances or arrests of journalists, doctors, activists and scientists.

Into the insistence coronavirus couldn't be transmitted from person to person until January 20, when the first evidence emerged on December 6.

Into how China allowed millions of people to leave Wuhan after the outbreak with an untold number flying overseas, infecting countries the world over.

Shouldn't we all - regardless of where we sit on the political spectrum - be concerned about how China, an emerging superpower, handled this outbreak?

I'll repeat what former Defence Force Deputy Secretary, executive director of the Australian Strategic Policy Institute, Peter Jennings said to me: "While the origins of the virus is unclear, what's very clear is that China is trying to weaponise the virus now." Let's compare the political response to China's criminal actions with Russia's shooting down of flight MH17.

MH17 was not treated as a left or right issue. There was solidarity in calling for an investigation.

The unfortunate and sad reality is Australian politicians were less delicate with Russia. They were prepared to stand up and uphold our national interest. Yet the same approach is not being taken now when it comes to holding China to account.

It was easy to gang up on Russia as a natural villain because we don't have any critical trade or economic ties with them. But with China, our largest trading partner, our leaders are tongue-tied, mealy mouthed and struggle to even say that they no longer trust China. It's embarrassing.

Just the mention of an independent inquiry into their actions saw them threaten to cut off trade with Australia.

Imagine if Scott Morrison had threatened to shirt-front Xi Jinping. It would probably be World War III.

This shows we have already gone too far down the road of oppression of free speech, living by China's values, to avoid offence.

It shows we have become far too dependent on China for our prosperity and failed to diversify.

In the short term it's always going to be easier kowtowing to China because any trade-related impact China could impose on us would be felt immediately.

But we need to think longer-term about allowing a world superpower to be able to conduct itself like China is right now with no accountability, and with barely a critical word uttered from our leaders.

While Morrison's endgame is holding China to account, there is a bizarre war being waged by some in the bureaucracy against the US. It is without the government's backing.

There are small-time bureaucrats stirring up conflict with our closest ally, who actually shares our values.

These bureaucrats have their hands nowhere near the US intelligence on Wuhan which is managed by ASIS and the foreign ministry. Yet these bureaucrats, charged with protecting Australia's national security, have been trying to create a problem between the US and Australia, instead of focusing on the greater issue of China.

As I reported on The Daily Telegraph's front page on Wednesday, one senior federal source said there were emerging fears in the intelligence community that the US administration could be repeating mistakes made by George Bush when he pressured the UN weapons inspector to declare Saddam Hussein possessed weapons of mass destruction.

It really is an absurd comparison because the US is on the same page as Australia that the virus may have leaked from a laboratory and it needs to be investigated. The difference is Australia's need for diplomacy given our reliance on China versus the United States' politically expedient position to attack China.

The concerns of these bureaucrats do not accord with the Prime Minster's view. I repeat, these expendable bureaucrats do not share the same view of Scott Morrison. This is significant.

To that end, there has been criticism of one department head, Home Affairs boss Mike Pezzullo, from within the federal government.

"Mike spends a little too much time speaking to journalists," a government insider said.

Morrison's real focus is holding China to account.

As Mike Pompeo said yesterday: "China could have prevented the deaths of hundreds of thousands of people worldwide. China could have spared the world a descent into global economic malaise. They had a choice.

"China is still refusing to share the information we need to keep people safe, such as viral isolates, clinical specimens and details about the many COVID-19 patients in December 2019, not to mention 'patient zero'."The fact that an investigation into the origin and outbreak is being resisted heavily by China is all the evidence you need that they have something to hide.
---
Dams are full so why the limits?

It appears that La Nina may be rearing her head again with the Bureau of Meteorology stating that if it occurs, the Hawkesbury Nepean area could be subject to serious flooding, thus affecting many new suburbs in Sydney's northwest (La Nina's reign poses flood threat for west, 25/8).

This will of course be exacerbated by the fact that Warragamba Dam is full to overflowing and we have little further storage infrastructure to help mitigate La Nina's effect.

If this is correct, why then do we still have water restrictions in place and why is Sydney Water, in expensive advertising, telling us to conserve water?

Our politicians and water bureaucrats need to come to grips with this. Peter Cattlin, Freshwater

Fire recommendations have to be implemented Yes Anna Caldwell, the independent inquiry into the bushfires has made 76 recommendations and they have been accepted by the NSW government (Green tape torched, 25/8).

Less green tape, hazard burns when property is at risk, aerial firefighting with water bombing planes to be the first - not last - response must be a great idea and trials of grazing in national parks are just a few of the key points.

Everything must be done by all sides to ensure we never see another devastating fire season like we saw just a few months ago. Twenty five lives lost, including six firefighters, almost six million hectares and nearly 2500 homes destroyed is a terrible outcome and one that should never happen again.

Marg Swindells, Castle Hill

Green tape warning So the NSW government is going to adopt all 76 recommendations from the bushfire royal commission (Green tape torched, 25/8).

Come on, you would have to be very dense if you think for one minute that the green bureaucrats, public servants and council officers are going to allow a single tree to be cleared around someone's home.

They will put in place insurmountable obstacles that will never be overcome. Joe Richards, Harrington

Wonderful memories There are so many wonderful stories about European immigrants who came to Australia to work on the Snowy Hydro-Electric Scheme (Snowy 2.0 a family affair, 25/8).

Leaving their countries of origin to work hard in a climate similar to where they grew up, we owe them our gratitude.

My two "zios" (Italian uncles) arrived in 1927 to work as cooks at the Burrinjuck Dam, which is part of the early hydro-electric scheme.

So proud is Mr Salvestro to see his granddaughter Bella following in his footsteps to work on Hydro 2.0. Obviously she has the work ethic of her "Nonno".

Gloria Velleley, Belrose Awake to woke

Dr Kevin Donnelly was right to lament the rise of covert political activism within Australian classrooms at the expense of educational standards, which have inevitably been in free fall in recent years (Where woke comes from, 25/8).

The woke warriors, like all committed leftists, have an almost-demented obsession with breaking down social structure and championing identity politics, which views daily life through the prisms of race, sex and gender.

As he affirms, the social engineering forays of frustrated neo-Marxist and Green-Left teachers have largely succeeded, as they have viewed schools as bastions of potential civil change, due to the presence of thousands of young, malleable minds.

As Donnelly notes, due to the influence of Brazilian Marxist Paulo Freire's concept of critical literacy, the current teaching of English in many progressive schools is now no longer about the formal rules of grammar, written expression and clear thinking. Instead, students are instructed how to deconstruct and critique texts in terms of power relationships. Thus, a new generation of woke activists is awakened to the supposed horrendous evils of white settlement and Western culture.

Peter Waterhouse, Craigieburn, Vic

Religious undertones I think Nick Cave recently referred to this insidious and randomly violent covert Marxist insurgency as "bad religion" (Where woke comes from, 25/8).

The irony of course is stunning, being that a major front to this cultural revolution is our ABC and SBS, where popular culture has been hijacked as they attempt to lure in all the cool kids in the quadrangle with music shows such as Rage and popular quiz segments.

Of course the scoffing South Park-style goths at the ABC have claimed Nick Cave as their own but he's having none of it. He's way too adult for these indoctrinated "Children of the Corn".

Robert Brown, Davistown

Why the silence?

It is refreshing to read Andrew Bolt's comments on hydroxychloroquine and the importance of zinc in both protecting against and treating early stage COVID-19 (Coronavirus but where's the zinc?, 23/8).

Since the beginning of this pandemic I have been advocating for the use of vitamins C, D and zinc. I have done so based on my clinical knowledge from more than four decades working in nutritional health, but also encouraged by research into COVID-19 being conducted around the world.

This suggests zinc has enormous potential, and in conjunction with hydroxychloroquine can significantly improve patient outcomes. Studies also show Vitamin D provides important immunity benefits against COVID-19, both defending against infection and reducing severity of symptoms.  Intravenous vitamin C is being used overseas to treat the cytokine "storm". There are both political and commercial reasons why these largely safe and easily available treatments are being ignored, but very few therapeutic ones.

It is frustrating not to see more leadership on this issue. Speaking out is not a pathway to popularity, but it may help save lives.

Professor Ian Brighthope, Brighton, Vic

Poor perception The problem with aged care is not a matter of government funding, nor is it an issue of a shortage of trained professionals. It's that aged care isn't a respected form of nursing.  Working in aged care is often regarded as a form of babysitting.  Until this perception changes, aged care will always play second fiddle to the kind of nursing that occurs in hospitals.

Ashley Bell, Harris Park

The walking blind As we know, driving a vehicle while using a mobile phone is illegal.  Many times we see pedestrians crossing the road, visually glued to their phone and blindly expecting motorists to get out of their way.  Surely if pedestrians choose to cross or use any public road, they should be legally bound to the same rules regarding mobile phones as motorists and subject to the same penalties as drivers.

Jan Partington, Wahroonga

Briefly ...

Border closures may destroy jobs and cripple the economy, but I am sure they save lives as well.

Kathe Fraser, Bellevue Hill * * * Congratulations go to Tim Blair for his article (Bias from hat to feet, 24/8) reminding us of the embarrassing attempt by ABC presenters Lisa Miller and Michael Rowlands to put a leftist spin on a school student's actions in Washington last year. Spin and ooga booga belong in the same bin.

Rob Jones, Panania * * * We have turned into a nation of whingers.

We are fortunate to be living in the best country in the world. We are confronted with a problem at the moment not of our doing and we will fight to the end. The government is doing its best in an unprecedented event. So here is my whinge - stop whinging.

Jack Jackson, Burleigh Heads

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
THE NRL is paying for babysitting to help the wives and partners of players, just one of many contributions to the enormous cost of running the competition during a pandemic.

It can be revealed it is costing a massive $20 million to keep the NRL season going under COVID-19 restrictions.

The code was one of the first sports in the world to return to competition on May 28.

But to achieve that the NRL needed to leave no stone unturned in protecting the health and safety of players, staff, clubs and the community.

The NRL had budgeted for a $16 million COVID spend but after just six weeks of footy, that figure is expected to rise to $20 million due to shifting Melbourne Storm into Queensland.

Charter flights for teams going interstate for matches and the hiring of biosecurity personnel at every game are also responsible for the NRL's huge weekly outlay.

The decision to house the Warriors on the Central Coast and the Melbourne Storm on the Sunshine Coast, and even pay $1000-a-month nanny service for wives and partners at home in New Zealand, are also part of the spend.

The Warriors' team of -almost 50 players and staff have been in NSW for the past two months, spending the majority of that time at Terrigal.

The Storm were forced to leave Victoria last week for the Sunshine Coast, where they could stay for the rest of the season.

Despite the multimillion-dollar outlay, it is still far below the NRL's initial fear that the game would haemorrhage $500 million by suspending the entire season.

ARL Commission boss Peter V'landys said ticket sales from the return of crowds, plus the rescheduled State of Origin series, would aid the game's financial recovery.

"In order to put in place the strictest of biosecurity measures, the costs we have to bear to play the game are between $16 and $20 million," he said.

"We can't operate without those measures.

"The majority of those costs are the Warriors, the chartered flights for teams and the biosecurity officers. The Storm now being based on the Sunshine Coast will also contribute to that cost.

"We're abiding by the biosecurity rules by the fact we're crossing every 'i' and every 't'.

"As you saw when we stood down Canterbury's Aiden Tolman a few weeks ago after a COVID scare, we immediately took action.

"The cost is all part of keeping the competition going.

"We're doing everything we can to keep the spirit and the morale up of everybody.

"Because we were able to get the competition back by May 28 and the crowds back sooner than what we budgeted for, things are looking better. "We're still going to make a hefty loss, but it's nowhere near the original $500 -million."
---
Some have changed clubs, others have the promise of a more meaningful role on the horizon while others are looking to bounce back from a bit of a 2020 nightmare.

Check out the 21 players to watch for the 2021 KFC SuperCoach NRL season. Rob Sutherland and Wilson Smith report...

1 Siosifa Talakai - Games 15, PPG: 55, MPG: 59 In a seven-game span from Rounds 13-19 last season, the former Rabbitoh averaged 71MPG and 75PPG with a 90 and two triple-figures scores for Cronulla. He's not a 'base stat monster' however, Talakai is capable of racking up big base stat games for an edge, scoring 70 in base in Round 18 and 59 in Round 14. Adding to his appeal is that Talakai spent a fair portion of his time at centre - and could be eligible for dual position status. He should be priced around the likes of Dale Finucane, Kevin Proctor and Liam Martin, and, while he lacks the assured minutes of these types, he possesses far more attacking upside - not to mention that DPP. A tempting CTW starter.

2 Tino Fa'asuamaleaui- Games: 19, PPG: 57, MPG: 46 He played a mixture of bench, edge, lock and even started at prop for one game at Melbourne. At the Titans he should cement a position as the No.13 and play around 55MPG, though he may start at prop and average close to 50MPG. Regardless, minutes in the middle are SuperCoach money for Tino. In the eight games where he played 45-plus minutes in the middle, Tino averaged 77PPG. That is significantly boosted by tries but he also has a good workrate, averaging 0.96 base points per minute. That's a better base rate output than the likes of Addin Fonua-Blake, Jason Taumalolo and Pat Carrigan managed last year despite averaging fewer minutes.

3 Latrell Mitchell - Games: 14, PPG: 59, MPG: 76 After a slow start at a new club and position, fullback Mitchell proved a rollercoaster ride for owners. He scored as low as nine points and as high as 112 before a two-week suspension for striking Josh Reynolds. On his return Mitchell went on a tear, averaging 75.8, with a low of 43 and a high of 141. Sadly, Mitchell tore his hamstring in Round 16 to end his season. So what to expect in 2021? Well, in just 14 matches Mitchell managed 24 linebreak assists and 15 try assists. If you take out the first two rounds, Mitchell averaged 65.75. That was good enough to rank him ninth at fullback, even though he was a CTW/FLB. But the fullback position is loaded and Mitchell's lack of work compared to his rivals will scare off many. But the reward is there, given he will start at a fair price.

4 Charlie Staines - Games: 2, PPG: 112, MPG: 54 In 107 minutes of NRL action in 2020 'The Forbes Ferrari' scored six tries, including a sensational four on debut. Staines has been earmarked to take the starting wing spot from Josh Mansour, who could leave the Panthers. He won't be a bargain basement price, but nor will he be priced anywhere near his career average. Talent like his should be in your squad for sure.

5&6 Reece Robson - Games: 14, PPG: 56, MPG: 62/Reuben Cotter - Games: 10, PPG: 40, MPG: 50 Should one of these young hookers lock in an 80-minute role at the Cowboys then they would have strong claims to being the mid-range must to start 2021. The Cowboys have three No.9s with Jake Granville there. In five consecutive 80-minute games at dummy half, Robson averaged 77.4PPG and exceeded 50 points in base each match. He played one other 80-minute game in Round 12 for a lazy 88 points (57 in base). Cotter, the starting rake for the Cowboys' final six games, averaged 61PPG, largely in base. Neither want Granville anywhere near the team lists.

7 Tesi Niu - Games: 6, PPG: 29, MPG: 57 (pictured) Niu's best two games came in Rounds 8 and 9 against the Warriors (53 points) and Bulldogs (58 points). He scored a try assist in each game, but the key stat was his involvement, with 17 runs against the Warriors and 18 against the Bulldogs. Should we get lucky and Niu snag DPP CTW/FLB status and he wins the start at fullback then he will be a tempting cheapish CTW buy.

8 Hudson Young - Games: 15, PPG: 54, MPG: 58 Looks the man most likely to take John Bateman's position on the right edge for the Raiders. In the six games he started on an edge last season, Young played the full 80 in all of them and averaged 48 points. That's not super exciting but it is brought down by scores of 28 (Storm) and 32 (Roosters) against two of the toughest teams in the comp. In the other four games, Young's scores read 68 (56 base), 46 (48), 64 (57) and 50 (50) for an average of 57PPG (41.75 base). That's pretty promising, despite a slightly inflated 2021 starting price.

9 Braidon Burns - Games: 8, PPG: 40, MPG: 70 Following a horror injury-hit 2020, Burns should force his way back into the South Sydney starting 13, on the coveted left edge too. With a good workrate, he averages in the low 30s in base, and on top of that he produces excellent tackle bust numbers and above-average offloads too. If he's priced around his 2020 average of 40PPG, Burns will be worth serious mid-range consideration.

10 Jordan Riki - Games: 5, PPG: 35, MPG: 42 In the running to take David Fifita's starting second-row slot. After making his NRL debut from the bench in Round 14, his minutes progressed and culminated in an 80-minute, 50-base-point effort against the Cowboys in Round 20 that included 38 tackles, eight runs, an offload and a couple of tackle busts. We're not talking 'keeper country' scores but, considering his age and price, we are talking ability and opportunity and this is a player who should be in your watchlist.

11 Tom Flegler - Games: 13, PPG: 45, MPG: 44 Flegler started nine games last year (averaging 47PPG and 47.5MPG) and played four more off the bench (averaging 41PPG and 36MPG). Importantly for SuperCoach, Flegler's not just a worker, there's a bit of flash as he averaged eight points a game in offloads/tackle busts. With Joe Ofahengaue's 48MPG, played mostly through the middle, gone, and Matt Lodge on the outer, expect Flegler to jump above him in the pecking order. Not a 'cheapie' by any means, Flegler is certainly capable of adding 10 points to his 2020 PPG and worth keeping a close pre-season eye on.

12 Victor Radley - Games 7, PPG: 50, MPG: 51 (pictured) Another rollercoaster year highlighted by injury. His first five rounds were 25 points (55 minutes), 70 (69), 62 (67) and 105 (66), before the minutes dried up. In Round 5, Radley scored 49 in 48 minutes, Round 6 just 34 in 44. And Round 7, Radley ruptured his ACL and the season was over. So what happens in 2021? When fit, expect him to get plenty of minutes, although not straight away. Watch how his minutes progress and if it looks like he's back to 60-plus then jump on and enjoy the ride.

13 Christian Welch - Games: 16, PPG: 51, MPG: 43 He didn't register solid starter minutes until Round 9, but in 10 games for the dominant Melbourne Storm, he averaged 59.6PPG in 51.4MPG. In the final five games of that stretch the Queensland Origin prop averaged 67.6PPG in 55.2MPG. Welch appears to be another who will be priced 10PPG below what we can reasonably expect him to produce. He won't blow you away but he should keep pace with far pricier options while slowly building in value and sometimes that's all you want.

14 Luke Thompson - Games: 10, PPG: 51, MPG: 54 Forget his mid-season arrival and COVID-hit campaign. Veteran prop Aiden Tolman and his 61MPG are gone and Thompson should pick up the bulk of those minutes in a full-time shift to the front row after pinch-hitting at lock to cover for an injured Adam Elliott. Yet another forward for whom a 10PPG increase on 2020 output is realistic.

15 Sam Walker - Yet to play NRL Expected to be the Roosters' long-term halfback after the club released Kyle Flanagan. No certainty to start 2021 with Lachie Lam offering a bigger-bodied alternative, but should be in your team if there's even a whisper that he may start. It would be nice if we can jag dual halfback, five-eighth eligibility as rookie-priced DPP halves add great flexibility to your halves.

16 Tom Trbojevic - Games: 7, PPG: 67, MPG: 73 Just 19 games in two years for an all-important fullback spot is risky, but Tommy Turbo is capable of punching out triple-figure boomers with ease and possessing a floor of around 70 points. Trbojevic is cheap at a 67PPG average as 2017-19 he averaged near enough 10PPG better and the faster game under the six-again rule application is custom-built for work-hungry fullbacks who hang around the ruck like a kelpie looking for work.

17 Tariq Sims - games: 9, PPG: 46, MPG: 68 Injuries limited him to just nine games and his MPG dropped 10 minutes on the 78MPG he averaged in 2019. Tyson Frizell's departure from St George Illawarra means Sims will be needed to play big minutes. In 2020 he played the full 80 minutes three times and averaged a tick under 60PPG. The year before, 15 of his 19 games were the full 80 minutes. An edge who can play some middle, if Sims can stay healthy he's every chance to average 10+ PPG more than he managed in 2020, making him a stepping stone to someone better.

18 Christian Tuipulotu - Games: 1, PPG: 67, MPG: 80 In just one game Tuipulotu scored 67 points with 23 runs, four tackle busts, a linebreak and a try - all against the Melbourne Storm. That's the work-rate we want from a winger and why Manly snapped him up from the Roosters. Tuipulotu also played one game in the NSW Cup in 2020 and had 22 runs for 157m - workrate. I expect him to put serious pressure on incumbent winger Jorge Taufua and, when he gets selected, he comes straight into our SuperCoach squad.

19/20 Jacob Liddle - Games: 6, PPG: 31, MPG: 30/Jake Simpkin - Yet to play NRL Liddle would appear to have the early running for the Tigers' hooking job but, with an injury history, Simpkin will likely get a run sooner rather than later.

In the five of his 44 games where Liddle played 50+ minutes, he averaged 62PPG (61MPG). Simpkin impressed through the junior ranks playing Queensland under-18 Origin in 2019 (41 tackles, 86 running metres and a try) before COVID-19 restricted him to just one game of NSW Cup in 2020 (45 minutes with 26 tackles made, 32 running metres and a try assist). Whichever player wins Round 1 selection will be worth consideration as a cheapie hooker option.

21 Valentine Holmes - Games: 12, PPG: 58, MPG: 73 With a proper off-season under his belt, 2021 could produce the best of Holmes, if he keeps the fullback role from Hamiso Tabuai-Fidow. Holmes had a season average of 58 points (64.5 if you take out injury affected games). With four tries, nine try assists, seven linebreaks, 10 linebreak assists, three SuperCoach scores above 90 and goalkicking, the value is there as a mid-range fullback, given the Queensland Origin winger ended 2020 with a $88,200 price drop.
---
Energy & water key to bush prosperity Warren Mundine's commentary regarding The Daily Telegraph's 2020 Bush Summit is a vision that many, many Australians have (Not just a coastal nation, 28/8).

We have for too long listened to the green left and those bureaucrats with similar ideologies, who have stagnated our country.

Water management, energy production, regional growth and land management are key to our development as our population increases.

Hopefully, the Prime Minister and the LNP Coalition are listening and reading because Mr Mundine has summed it up in four columns of print.

Peter Cattlin, Freshwater.

"" " Warren Mundine's great recommendations shows his knowledge and understanding of the bush.

He is spot on - Australia needs action planning and vision to bring energy, water, and support to regional areas, so the bush and all the nation can thrive.

Sure there were some mistakes made in our reaction to COVID-19 virus, but we will learn from these. To hasten economic and social recovery, it would be great if politicians put personality clashes aside, as well as unnecessary red tape, ideology, and power tug of wars, and worked together in the national interest.

Twenty five million Australians are asking for strength in leadership, insight and new ideas. Mr Mundine is correct - open up the bush with water and energy innovations.

R. Brown, Ballina

United vision can beat the ideological divide I applaud The Daily Telegraph Bush Summit and couldn't agree more with Anna Caldwell (Fighting for the bush, 28/8).

It is indeed impressive that an alliance of farming, agricultural and conservation groups "seems to put any divisive green versus brown politics to one side and comes together for practical outcomes that support farmers, bush residents and the environment".

We all need to look after the world we live in and not let ideology get in the way. More of it.

Tom Hunt, The Oaks

Help for heroes a priority Giving veterans a dedicated advocate to tackle high suicide rates is surely an idea whose time has come, if not even overdue, given the 500 veterans' suicides since 2001 (Dedicated power to probe vet suicides, 28/8).

Fingers crossed, the creation of a National Commissioner for Defence and Veteran Suicide Prevention, following The Daily Telegraph's Save Our Heroes campaign, will provide families affected by a defence member or veteran suicide with the necessary independent and professional support.

Steve Ngeow, Chatswood

WHOse side are they on?

Anyone would have to be naive to think that the World Health Organisation would investigate the coronavirus pandemic situation thoroughly (Wuhan gets free pass, 28/8).

US President Donald Trump woke up to these clowns very early, and so should our Prime Minister and our politicians now.

I'm of the opinion WHO are an organisation sympathetic to China and one we can't afford and don't need.

Erwin Vitnell, Bathurst "" " The World Health Organisation team that went to China to check out the origin of COVID-19 spent three weeks in Beijing. Not once did they visit Wuhan, understood to be where the virus started (Wuhan gets free pass, 28/8).

This can only lend weight to the view that the WHO marches to the beat of China's drum.

Alan Heatley, Elanora Heights

Coaches are the scapegoats This really is so very unfair you know. These poor coaches of NRL teams getting sacked for their teams' lack of performance and position on the league ladder (Seibold denies player revolt, 27/8).

It's the players that are on the field and playing so badly - why not sack them and start the team anew?

It's not as if the coaches grabbed the ball and ran up and down the field and failed to gain any points.

They gave the team the instructions and advice at the start of the game, but it's the players that just ignored it and carried on losing.

My sympathies go out to the poor coaches who are sacked needlessly for their teams' poor performance on the field.

Diana McCarty, Emu Plains

Island isolation needed It is time to face up to the fact that we either close the international border or properly enforce quarantine (Sleazy security and army refusal in quarantine inquiry, 28/8).

It is obvious the term "security guard" has been completely overstated because they appear unqualified for the role and city hotels are unsuited for a pandemic quarantine.

Christmas Island is the place for returning travellers where we can be assured they are COVID free after quarantine and are able to return to the community without fear of spreading infection.

Otherwise we will be continually chasing our tail with constant and random outbreaks.

Gary Bryant, Gladesville

Multi-tasking lesson for Dan Victorian Premier Dan Andrews has stated: "If the PM has time to be doing those things, that's fine for him, I don't." Perhaps a theatrical understanding of multi-tasking would better equip him to competently manage his state.

Our PM Scott Morrison does many things collectively and well. Mr Andrews seems to be having a problem doing the one thing he is obviously focused on, not so well.

R.M. Max, Shoal Bay

Beware the underdog As this has been the week of the Republican Convention in America, perhaps it is opportune to briefly assess US President Donald Trump (Battle lines drawn, 28/8).

He is blamed for many things but, love him or hate him, prior to COVID-19, America was in reasonable shape. Unemployment was down, jobs were on the increase with the share market and business confidence on the rise.

It appears that one of his party's catchcries will be law and order which could be a winner for him particularly with the current prevalence of violent demonstrations.

While the election is still some time away, the betting agencies certainly have him as the underdog.

Is it possible, however, that another minor miracle may occur and he out-Trumps them all. Again Darryl Tutton, Wollstonecraft

Drug slur a diversion tactic Donald Trump continues to debase American political discourse by suggesting Democrat challenger Joe Biden may have taken performance enhancing drugs (Battle lines drawn, 28/08).

And credit to your reporter to point out that he offered no evidence. This is how political journalism should be conducted.

For months Trump has been convincing himself Biden is senile and incoherent. Now that the Democrat challenger had a successful convention, he must be taking drugs.

In Trump's mind, only he gets to be the winner, and everyone else must be cheating. Like most of Trump's outrageous suggestions, it is a projection of his own anxiety and a diversion tactic.

Han Yang, North Turramurra

Briefly ...

It's an ill wind that doesn't blow some good. And so it is with the coronavirus. Schoolies Week on the Gold Coast has been cancelled on health grounds - how good is that. This excuse for teen drunkenness, drug taking and loutish behaviour is something we can all do without.

John George, Terrigal

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
THE return of the pre-season Nines concept has lasted just one year with the tournament again placed on the scrap heap.

Club bosses were told the Nines competition - which took place in Perth for the first time this year after a two-year hiatus and ran at a financial loss - was not part of the pre-season calendar for next year in a phone hook-up with NRL boss Andrew Abdo.

The tournament was held in Auckland from 2014-2017 before its return in Australia this year. It failed to generate the money needed to be profitable and, given the COVID-19 crisis, the game is looking to save any dollar it can.

What won't be lost to the pre-season though is the -annual All-Stars match. The game is tentatively slated for February 21 before the competition proper kicks off on March 11 - a day earlier than the start to this season.

Some clubs expressed their concerns around the timing of the All-Stars match given how late this year's season will run for the game's elite players. The final State of Origin match will be played on November 18, meaning players who are part of that extended squad will not be due back to pre-season training until the new year.

Clubs are worried their best players would have limited preparation with their team before they need to release them again for the All-Stars match. Clubs are likely to have pre-season trials either side of the All-Stars game.

Abdo again stressed the importance for the people within each club's 55-person bubble to adhere to the strict biosecurity protocols given the breaches in recent days.

The NRL also hinted they would explore the potential of revamping the protocols ahead of next season if again the country is caught up in the pandemic.

Clubs have asked for looser restrictions to enable players to enjoy some basic freedoms as the angst grows among those inside the bubble.

NRL's head of football Graeme Annesley also took part in the phone hook-up and gave the clubs a general warning about the planned crackdown on crusher tackles. Clubs were also told the NRL were continuing discussions with the RLPA regarding squad sizes and the salary cap figure for next season. There has been a push to reduce squad sizes to about 28 and a drop in the salary cap of up to 5 per cent.
---
Attempts by Queensland and other states to keep their borders shut is not only in defiance of medical advice, but is putting the entire country's recovery at stake Queensland's bid to turn the pandemic into the coronavirus State of Origin, pitting itself against Gladys Berejiklian and NSW, is one of the great missteps this country has seen in the handling of this virus.

As Treasurer Dominic Perrottet quipped to me yesterday, "only in Queensland would they want to buy an airline but ban planes leaving the airport".

The absurdity of the ban by Queensland and other states on interstate travel while tourism opens up within borders would be comical if it didn't represent such a cruel blow to jobs and our national economy.

While Berejiklian has led the charge to open up borders between the states, the premiers of Queensland, Western Australia, South Australia and Tasmania who are resisting the idea are showing blatant disregard for the underpinnings of our -federation.

Let's be clear on one thing. The push to reopen the borders is not about "letting the virus rip" or sacrificing vulnerable lives to the gods of GDP, as the likes of Queensland's Annastacia Palaszczuk and Western Australia's Mark McGowan have crudely and cynically portrayed it.

In fact, Deputy Chief Medical Officer Paul Kelly has made it clear that there is no health advice warranting interstate border closures.

The rates of community transmission are so low across the country -experts believe the border closures make little difference.

Safety is not the danger here. -Instead, the risk is that having all but won the war against coronavirus, at least within our own borders, Palaszczuk and her fellow panicky -premiers risk costing us the peace, which should come in the form of a robust recovery.

Instead, these politically driven border closures quite simply put an almighty handbrake on the national economy and desperate tourism -sector, which could take a decade to recover if restrictions are not eased soon.

And for those other states who are pointing the finger at NSW and dramatising our now-minuscule caseload, we are still outstripping the other major states when it comes to economic confidence.

This is despite NSW being hardest hit by virus cases and job losses. The Westpac survey, taken between May 4-8 showed the consumer sentiment index in NSW rebounded sharply rising 22.9 per cent to 91.1 Queensland sits at just 87.3, Western Australia at 90.3, Victoria at 85 and South Australia at 83.7.

The index across the country is still relatively weak by historic standards, however it shows NSW has suc-ceeded in communicating to its citizens that there is an economic pathway out of our current torpor.

I asked Premier Berejiklian how she explains these figures, given our state has been hardest hit.

"I think firstly because NSW is -innovative and resilient. But I also thing - at the risk of sounding a bit immodest - that our government has kept focusing on jobs and has said that and demonstrated that," she told me in an interview.

"Even though we know people are suffering and hurting I think they also feel confident there's a way out.

"I don't want to take away from the misery a lot of households are feeling but for others I think there's an air of potential hope that things will get a bit better or that they have some level of security." It is for this reason - jobs and the economy - that NSW is red hot on opening borders.

It's also worth remembering Berejiklian was easily one of the most cautious of all leaders in the nation as this crisis unfolded. She wanted to go harder and faster on lock-ups, including school shutdowns.

And yet she never shut the state's borders. Her moves to push for other states to lift theirs cannot possibly be interpreted as being lax on safety.

Palaszczuk keeps pointing to the fact that NSW has the most active cases in the country.

This is in no small part because Sydney is still the gateway to Australia, and we have been quarantining thousands upon thousands of citizens from other states in our hotels for two weeks when they return home from overseas.

Many of the state's cases recently have been detected among these travellers, before they have been released into the community.

Of course NSW cannot escape its blame for the Ruby Princess fiasco, or the Newmarch aged care outbreak.

But neither of these things should mean that we now put the national economy and jobs at risk by prolonging unnecessary border restrictions.

Palaszczuk in particular is playing with fire. Facing an election this year, her hubris on this border issue will be dimly viewed by voters in places like Cairns, the Whitsundays and swaths of regional Queensland who are on their knees because of a dearth of tourism.

"NSW is focused on getting our economy back and firing on all cylinders and we see trade and tourism as an important part of that," Perrottet told me yesterday.

"Queensland's border policy is -ultimately a matter for their leaders, but the real economic losers are tourism operators and business owners who need as much help as possible as they emerge from the COVID-19 lockdown." The irony is, when it comes to tourism, the NSW sector can benefit from the current circumstances.

All those Sydneysiders who crave the north Queensland warmth can head to regional NSW instead.

As Berejiklian said, we will welcome other state's tourists here even if they won't welcome us in their holiday towns.

This country can be stronger without warring premiers who delight in the sounds of their own chest beating. Bring down the borders and give tourism operators and jobs a fair shot.
---
CHINA CASHING IN ON VIRUS: ENVOY THE Chinese government has created a global pandemic through their "gross negligence, obsessive secrecy and brazen dishonesty" - and is now using it to advance their interest in our region, the United States ambassador to Australia says.

Condemning China over its culpability in the spread of COVID-19, Ambassador Arthur B. Culvahouse described President Xi Jinping's communist regime as "bullies" who were trying to destabilise our region with a "shocking new vigour" while the rest of the world dealt with the health and economic consequences of the coronavirus.

Mr Culvahouse, nominated US ambassador to Australia by United States President Donald Trump in late 2018, said that China was taking full advantage of the pandemic to assert itself in a fashion typical of the -Chinese Communist Party "playbook".

"What Foreign Minister Marise Payne rightly referred to as destabilising activities are hardly new tactics from the CCP playbook, but they are being pursued with shocking new vigour as the rest of the world is focused on combating the COVID-19 pandemic, one which the CCP - through gross negligence, obsessive secrecy and brazen dishonesty - first covered up while exporting it to the world," he said.

"Sadly, in this playbook creating a global pandemic is treated as one more opportunity to advance geo--strategic objectives." Mr Culvahouse made the remarks in an article he wrote on the "unbreakable" Australia and United States alliance, published on a government and defence website Defence Connect.

His comments follow Ms Payne's criticism of China for reportedly sinking a Vietnamese fishing boat and stepping up other "destabilising activities" in the South China Sea.

In his opinion piece, Mr Culvahouse asserts that the "unbreakable alliance" between the US and Australia is essential while the CCP has "aggressively deployed its navy, coastguard and maritime militia across the South China Sea, seeking to advance a spurious claim of sole proprietorship over this massive international waterway".

"Having only recently sunk a Vietnamese fishing boat and locked naval weapon systems on a Philippine ship, it is even now in the midst of another outrageous confrontation over oil and gas rights within Malaysia's exclusive economic zone." Mr Culvahouse described the manoeuvres as "Beijing's heavy-handed attempts to unlawfully impose its territorial claims on the rest of the region".

"To counter this, three US Navy warships were joined by Australia's HMAS Parramatta for a series of important bilateral exercises in the South China Sea," he said.

"This activity was an important demonstration that the US and Australia will continue to stand strong together for our timeless values and mutually beneficial interests." While China continued to take advantage of the coronavirus pandemic, Mr Culvahouse said he did not believe the "bullies" would win.

"This is why I believe we will ultimately prevail, because bullies don't have partners, and they certainly don't have friends who come close to matching the durable, comprehensive, and integrated quality of the Unbreakable Alliance between the United States and Australia," he said.

"For the sake of all who value open commerce and the rule of law, we shall not go gentle into that good night." The United States has supported Australia's call for an independent inquiry into the origins and outbreak of COVID-19, with the resolution on it going to the World Health Assembly on Monday where a consensus will be sought on the matter.

China has relentlessly attacked Australia for proposing an inquiry, with its ambassador in Canberra last month threatening a boycott of Australian trade.

US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo has criticised China's economic retaliation against Australia following the call for an inquiry.

"Who in the world wouldn't want an investigation of how this happened to the world? We would urge every country, all of our partners, to demand that we get answers for what happened here, but also that we ... get the transparency, that the world gets the transparency it needs," Mr Pompeo said last month.

Mr Culvahouse, who has been in Australia for just over a year, serves as the President's personal representative to the government and people of Australia. In the piece, he writes that Australia and the United States share the same view of the world and have the same values.
---
BRYCE Cartwright and Jai Arrow headline a slew of familiar faces in unfamiliar places across the NRL pre-season.

Cartwright was handed a lifeline at Parramatta after he was released from his contract with the Gold Coast Titans.

Ready to prove his career is far from over, Cartwright, who has joined the Eels on a one-year deal, cut a fit and healthy figure during a training session this week as he fights for a place in coach Brad Arthur's top 17 in season 2021.

Jai Arrow can expect his Sydney initiation to be a baptism of fire after the former Titans forward finally reported to Redfern for his first pre-season under coach Wayne Bennett.

Arrow will feel the full force of the Rabbitohs' rivalry with the Sydney Roosters in round three, when he faces Tricolours fullback James Tedesco for the first time since an ugly concussion incident between the pair during the State of Origin decider last month.

The latest additions to the New Zealand Warriors roster were all smiles during their pre-season camp on the NSW south coast.

COVID-19 travel restrict-ions have forced Sean O'Sullivan, Addin Fonua-Blake, Euan Aitken and Marcelo Montoya into a training camp at Kiama.

With the Warriors set to base themselves in NSW from January 3 for at least three months, the club's newest faces are set to play their first game for the Warriors before even stepping a foot in New Zealand.

At Concord, rising forward Stefano Utoikamanu was the latest in a long list of new recruits to begin his first pre-season with the club.

The Eels junior only started his pre-season with the Tigers two weeks ago but the 115kg prop has already reached 'training the house down' status.

"He's already shown he has a good engine, Stef has been training the house down," fellow Tigers forward Luciano Leilua said.

The Canberra Raiders unveiled youngsters Albert Hopoate and former Wigan Warriors backrower Harry Rushton.

The pair joined coach Ricky Stuart's squad this week for their first pre-season in the nation's capital.

While Rushton has been secured on a three-year deal, Hopoate is on a train and trial contract and will use the summer to press his claims for a top 30 spot.

Canterbury's prize recruit Nick Cotric isn't due to report to Belmore until after Christmas but the outside back hasn't been able to keep away from the gym. Cotric and Penrith winger Josh Mansour, who is on the lookout for a new home and could himself be in new colours this pre-season, have been training together in their off-season break.
---
MARKETS THE Australian sharemarket dipped despite a strong positive lead from Wall Street, weighed down by travel stocks after Brisbane -announced a snap three-day lockdown.

The ASX200 closed 0.36"per cent lower at 6799.5 points while the All Ordinaries Index declined 0.38 per cent to 7036.4.

OpenMarkets Group chief executive Ivan Tchourilov said the lockdown due to a spike in COVID-19 community transmission was a heavy blow for the already hard-hit tourism industry, especially just before the Easter long weekend.

Flight Centre shares fell 3.03 per cent to $17.95, Webjet gave up 2.8 per cent to $5.57 and Corporate Travel Management backtracked 1.56 per cent to $19.58.

In the airline sector, Regional Express declined 3.16"per cent to $1.53, and Qantas retreated 0.78 per cent to $5.07.

The Australian market had been expected to rally after the three main indices rallied on Wall Street on Friday.

The oil price lost ground after the massive ship blocking the Suez Canal was freed by a salvage team.

ThinkMarkets Australia analyst Carl Capolingua said the oil price pulled back to below $US60 per barrel again.

Origin Energy shares slipped 0.85 per cent to $4.69 and Oil Search softened 0.71"per cent to $4.19 but Santos added 0.7 per cent to $7.21.

Miners performed strongly amid higher commodities prices, with Mineral Resources advancing 2.54 per cent to $37.94, Fortescue Metals up 2.13 per cent to $20.58, BHP gaining 1.75 per cent to $45.86 and Rio Tinto up 1.75 per cent to $112.26.

Shares in poultry producer Inghams Group shed 4.72 per cent to $3.43 after announcing CEO Jim Leighton had left the company and was returning to the US for personal reasons. He's being replaced by non-executive director Andrew Reeves.

In the banking sector, ANZ slid 0.64 per cent to $27.99, Commonwealth Bank retreated 0.5 per cent to $85.57, National Australia Bank eased 0.15 per cent to $26.13 and Westpac was flat at $24.34.

Westpac CEO Peter King said a strong labour market and better than expected economic growth will likely shield the economy from any major disruption caused by the end of JobKeeper.

While Westpac economists estimate that up to 140,000 employees could lose their jobs as payments from the $90bn scheme end, Mr King expects many will find alternative employment in a surging jobs market. "From the economy's perspective there's actually a lot of underlying momentum in the economy," he said. "If you look at employment we're now back at 13 million people employed, which was the same number pre-COVID."
---
THE NRL has given clubs a "how to guide" to assimilate back into the community as players prepare to break free from the bubble for the first time in six months.

Players have also been told they will need their house screened before they are allowed to resume pre-season training, giving the clearest indication yet that players will be back in a bubble after their break heading into the new season.

The NRL has put together a 15-page post-season "protocols and education" pack which allows the players to roam like normal citizens as soon as their season comes to an end.

Players have been unable to eat at restaurants, visit loved ones or even play golf under the game's strict biosecurity protocols in recent months.

For the likes of Brisbane and North Queensland a return to normality could happen as soon as Sunday while the rest of the non finals-bound teams such as St George Illawarra, Wests Tigers, Gold Coast, Canterbury, Manly and the Warriors will be 'free' by Wednesday at the latest.

Clubs have been given a three-day window following their final match to complete reviews and exit medicals before players are officially released from the bubble. Mad Monday is formally banned while end of season awards nights must comply with government regulations.

Players have been told that "new household screens and medicals must be performed for all players and staff" before the commencement of pre-season. It also states "Apollo training protocols for November and December will be dependent on community status at the time".

Players who are picked in Origin squads will need to be COVID-19 tested two days before entering camp. And those in the grand final will have little time to celebrate as they are required to be in Origin camp three days after the October 25 decider.

Given what the players have had to adhere to this year, they have been granted an extra week of leave. Players with three years or less experience get seven weeks and players with six or more years in the NRL have at least nine weeks off.

That means pre-season training must not commence until November 16 for those who were inside the bubble this year. Teams can return to training with players who were not in this year's bubble from November 9. The documents also warns players of the potential career-threatening side effects of contracting COVID-19.
---
THE big Australian miners have welcomed China's move to change inspection rules for iron ore imports despite concerns shipments could be blocked under the new regime.

Brushing aside fears the change may mark a heightening in trade tensions, the mining industry yesterday said China was effectively streamlining the inspection process.

But their upbeat response came amid conflicting commentary on the potential impact of the changes, which take effect on June 1.

China has opted to do away with mandatory inspections of inbound iron ore in favour of a narrower regime of checks - sampling and testing shipments at the request of traders or importers.

In one state-run Chinese media outlet, the Global Times, the change was yesterday cast as a threat to Australian producers.

The Global Times quoted Chinese academic Yu Lei, a chief research fellow at the Research Centre for Pacific Island Countries at Liaocheng University, in the Shandong Province, suggesting it was "another implicit warning to Australia".

"It is associated with how Australia has acted, and a general decline in demand for steel on the global level," he was quoted as saying.

The media outlet, often seen as a proxy for the views of the Chinese government, explicitly linked the rule changes to trade tensions between Australia and China.

Since the start of last week, China has suspended imports of beef from four Australian abattoirs and slapped import taxes on Australian barley.

Those moves have coincided with a diplomatic dispute over a proposed inquiry into the origins of the COVID-19 virus, which first made headlines globally after an outbreak in the Chinese city of Wuhan.

The Global Times also reported, however, that the changes to iron ore inspections would not affect imports from Australia.

It noted the announcement came "amid tensions", and that "may lead some to believe it targets Australia".

"Though there is no evidence that the new adjustment will have any negative impact on future iron ore imports from Australia," it said.

The new customs rules will apply to all iron ore cargoes - not just those from Australia - China's General Administration of Customs said the changes were designed to promote deregulation and promote trade.

A BHP spokesman said the group supported the changes and believed they would "create a more efficient supply chain for producers like us as well as our Chinese customers".

Fortescue chief Elizabeth Gaines also welcomed the changes, saying the company remained a core supplier of iron ore to China.

"This is part of a broader suite of efficiency reform measures under development by the Chinese Government since 2015," Ms Gaines said.

Minerals Council of Australia chief Tania Constable said Australia was a "key partner with China's steel industry … and these reforms will enhance this valued business partnership".

Federal Trade Minister Simon Birmingham joined the industry in welcoming the reform, saying it was "positive example of the further opening of Chinese markets".

Shares in pureplay iron ore heavyweight Fortescue Metals fell 2.2 per cent, or 30c, yesterday to $13.60. BHP and Rio Tinto shares also fell, respectively sliding 0.6 per cent to $34.51 and 1 per cent to $93.91.

with Richard Ferguson The Australian
---
NSW has recorded a dozen new COVID-19 infections, including one with an -unknown origin.

Health authorities yesterday announced there had been 12 new infections in the 24 hours to 8pm Wednesday, including 10 which are linked with existing clusters and one in hotel quarantine. One case was also detec-ted which could not be traced to existing clusters of the -disease.

The new infections come as health authorities issue a new warning to anyone who visited Kids Learning Academy in Busby on July 29 after an infectious child attended the venue. St Pius X High School at Adamstown in Newcastle will be closed for the rest of the week after a student tested positive for coronavirus yesterday. The teenager was also a member of a soccer team that played at Arlington Oval in Dulwich Hill on Saturday.
---
'The great lesson of Watergate," said veteran reporter Bob Woodward, who broke the scandal that toppled US President Richard Nixon, "was that if Nixon had apologised early, or even midway through the scandal and demonstrated some soul-searching introspection, he would have been forgiven." The very same can be said of Victorian Premier Daniel Andrews over his government's decision to use private security instead of police and defence force personnel in the management of Victoria's hotel quarantine plan.

The difficulty of a crisis is that it requires momentous decisions in rapid fire time frames and that, often, it's only long after the worst of it passes that the impact of decisions become known. What might seem like a small decision at the time can, later on, become one of the most critical. It's important, when we look back at the events of Friday, March 27, not to forget this.

Do I think, knowing what they know now, that coming out of the National Cabinet at 1pm, the Andrews government would have made the decision and announced it at 3.15pm in the Premier's media conference, to use private security in quarantine hotels? No, I don't.

In a crisis, mistakes will be made, and while you must do everything to mitigate them, delay is just as risky. So, it requires a weighing of both. This is where the words of Woodward are so relevant to Victoria right now.

The Premier is being pursued over the question of who made the decision to use private security guards, not so much because it was an error but because he has used every political device available to him to avoid telling the truth. As always in political crises like this, it's the cover-up that brings the leader down.

For months, Victorians werekept in the dark about the origins of the state's second-wave outbreak until the Premier was forced to admit the disease had leaked out of the failed hotel quarantine operation when genomic testing confirmed 99 per cent of new cases were linked to hotels.

With things so clearly out of control, the federal government's repeated offer of ADF troops was finally taken up in late June - 850 personnel on their way - only to be abruptly withdrawn by the Andrews government the next day lest the "optics" of the ADF coming to the rescue in Victoria showed up the Premier, Police Minister Lisa Neville and their police and emergency union mates. We will never know what might have been the outcome if the troops had arrived. It was only after he could no longer spin away the need for an investigation that the Premier established the Coate Inquiry but, by its very terms of reference and powers under the state's Inquiries Act it lacked the grunt needed to get to the truth.

Of course, the Premier wants Coate to find that somehow no one made an actual decision to jettison police and instead employ private security, because any person who had made that decision would be culpable for the deaths of 800 Victorians out of the state's second-wave outbreak.

Powerful new industrial manslaughter laws in Victoria have put the wind up ministers, political staff and bureaucrats, and led to the farce of weeks of testimony where "I don't know", "I can't recall", "it wasn't me", and "I don't remember" has replaced any semblance of accountability in the state.

The line being put to the inquiry is that no one person made a decision here and that, instead, there was a government-wide "creeping assumption" that private security would be used, rather than Victoria Police or the ADF, to guard returning travellers. I regard this as wrong and nothing close to the truth.

Key decisions are made, they don't just happen. The notion that no one made this decision cannot be allowed to stand because it erodes the fundamental principle we have in our democracy of responsible government. I've been on the inside of government for 16 years - in times of crisis like the Martin Place siege, the downing of MH17, and the deployment of troops to fight against Islamic State - and let me tell you, every decision is made deliberately, the head of power to make that decision is carefully confirmed and every decision is authorised.

The decision to use private security in Victoria was made between 1pm, when National Cabinet concluded on Friday, March 27, and 3.15pm when Daniel Andrews publicly announced it. No "creeping assumption" becomes established in just two and half hours, and no Premier announces anything without being sure of what he is announcing, least of all a character like Andrews.

On Friday last week, all hell broke loose as the various parties to the COVID-19 Hotel Quarantine Inquiry lodged their closing submissions. Victoria Police couldn't have been more definitive, saying that they rejected any concept of a "creeping assumption", and said that a decision was made. Indeed, they pinpoint the time it was made as being within 1.16pm and 1.22pm - the much discussed six minute window, between then Chief Commissioner of Police Graham Ashton's text at 1.16pm asking whether his police officers would end up guarding hotels and another text at 1.22pm making clear that security guards were to be used (with a follow up text confirming this was all because of a "deal set up with DPC" (Department of Premier and Cabinet) for Victoria not to use police as in other states, but instead hire private security.

This is the critical decision that, with hindsight, led to 800 Victorians losing their life, hundreds of thousands of small businesses their livelihood, and, even as you read this today, has meant five million Melbourne residents remain in their 12th week of lockdown.

I had never attended a press conference as a member of the media until I fronted the Andrews press conference on Friday because I couldn't stomach the spin anymore. Valiant reporters have been asking tough questions for months, and for that they've been vilified online and trolled just for seeking the truth.

But isn't that what a free press is for? I couldn't care less about the #Istandwithdan haters. I have a thick skin. I've done my best to read all the evidence I can. Let me tell you, the holes are glaring, that's why, despite the Premier's skilful obfuscation, he can no longer smother and spin what's gone on.

Inside the Victoria Police submission is critical evidence that during the Ashton six-minute window there is a text from the Premier's private office to a deputy secretary (Mr Tim Ada) in the Premier's department referencing the provision of "security" in relation to the set-up of the hotel quarantine plan. This is just 19 minutes after the National Cabinet meeting had concluded that police and ADF would guard these hotels across the country, yet barely 20 minutes later, Victoria is going it alone with private security. There was never a "creeping assumption" about hotel security. There was a decision. There was a clear decision made involving the Premier's own office. It was made and communicated to Graham Ashton in the six-minute window and reconfirmed - as evidence to the Coate Inquiry shows - in a 2pm meeting between the Police Chief, the Police Minister and the head of Emergency Management Victoria. Daniel Andrews himself then announced the decision at 3.15pm out front of his own office.

If Daniel Andrews thinks otherwise, he can release his phone records and those of his key minister and staff, including his chief of staff who has never given any statement or evidence to this inquiry, to clear the record. He shouldn't need to be asked to do this by the inquiry. He should volunteer it in the public interest. He can do it today and he must do if we are to respect the dead by getting to the truth of what went so catastrophically wrong.
---
QUEENSLAND coach Kevin Walters says the series opener in Adelaide is likely to be axed because of the coronavirus pandemic.

State of Origin was scheduled to make its debut in South Australia for Game One on June 3 - a series launch was even held in Adelaide last month - but Walters believes the COVID-19 outbreak will force the event to be delayed.

The possible axing of Origin from Adelaide Oval would be a crushing promotional blow, with Walters suggesting all three games could be held in Sydney in October - scuppering the end-of-season Kangaroo tour.

"I think given the current climate, where the game is at, they will have to move it from Adelaide," Walters said.

"Certainly June 3 was game one ... it won't happen in Adelaide. So if it does happen, some suggestions have been all three games in Sydney with no crowds, but Origin will make it on TV screens around the world which will be a huge boost for the game.

"There's every chance of playing in front of empty stands and it's my thoughts that Origin will go ahead, that's just my personal opinion, but when it will be scheduled, I don't know.

"I think if Origin had to be played in October, we would go ahead and do that, that's best for the game."Walters told The Daily Telegraph he had been in talks with the QRL about the impact of COVID-19 on State of Origin. NRL hierarchy are investigating a number of options including the series being pushed back three months. "I'm confident State of Origin will happen this year but we have to make sure the health of safety of everyone is first and foremost," Walters said.
---
Australia needs to sharpen up its understanding of how Xi Jinping plays the game Australia is a child -playing chess against China the grand -master. When it comes to negotiations between Australia and China and the current spat, there are a few strategic differences between our nations that could explain why Australia is not coming out on top.

One of the two biggest differences are that Australians are direct in their communication behaviours and often pride themselves in calling a 'spade a spade' and our political structure -encourages short-term thinking with Australian states and federal parliaments limited to terms of three to four years.

On the other hand, Chinese culture employs indirect communication behaviours and takes a long-term view of things. How much "face" is lost or gained in communication is critical to decision making in China, alongside the solidity of their "guanxi" - or business relationships.

We are indeed in a game of chess with the masters and if we want any chance of winning, we need to understand the Chinese culture. The best way to do that is to get a grip on Sun Tzu's famous text The Art of War and the 36 Chinese strategies that are outlined in it.

During 2020 China has applied several of the 36 Chinese Strategies on Australia following Prime Minister Morrison's public call for the inquiry into the origins of the COVID-19 pandemic. These strategies are deeply embedded in Chinese politics, business, and trade, and across all facets of everyday life.

In the last application, China used Strategy Two - "Besiege Wei to rescue Zhao", which is used when you want to attack something your opponent holds dear. In this situation, Australia's good reputation across the globe is something that is held close to the heart of the Australia psyche.

We often perceive ourselves as a small country punching above our weight contributing positively to global affairs. It is against this image of ourselves that China has applied Strategy Two, seeking to damage our reputation and standing outside China when it used Twitter to show a fake image of an Australian soldier holding a knife at the neck of an -Afghan child.

The application of Strategy Two worked as planned because it pressed Australia's emotional buttons. As much as this photograph was, terrible the most appropriate way to respond to this strategy is calmly and strategically as opposed to emotionally.

This year China has also applied Strategy Twenty - "Trouble the water to catch the fish" - by announcing they would urge their citizens not to travel to Australia because of the supposed rise in racism against -Chinese people.

This strategy is used to create confusion. Instead of acting in a very reactive manner, we could have thought through the reality of this advice and realised this was not logical. Rather it was a successful strategic move on China's part to create confused reactions within Australia.

In August, Wang Xining, the deputy Head of Mission at China's embassy to Australia, used Strategy Thirty-Two - "The strategy of open city gates", which is a deliberate display of vulnerability. He addressed the National Press Club and in that speech he revealed the depth of China's hurt at Australia's focus on Wuhan as the source of the COVID-19 pandemic. It was the very public and direct manner in which Australia called for the international investigation into the origin of COVID-19 that has resulted in China "losing face", which is the hurt that Wang Xining referred to.

Wang Xining's speech was an invitation to understand China's concerns so Australia and China might be able to repair their relationship. Had we been able to listen through the filter of the 36 Chinese Strategies, we might have realised Wang Xining was inviting us to see the situation from China's point of view.

The only way forward for Australia is to understand Chinese culture. Australia has too much to lose to keep using our outrage and our Western negotiation approaches.

We are children playing chess with Chinese grand masters. Leonie McKeon is an expert on Chinese negotiation techniques. leoniemckeon.com
---
Powerful elites and media barons in WA have all but muted criticism of China, writes Jane Marwick

You'd think a billionaire springing a Chinese Communist Party diplomat on a federal government minister would be front page news in his home state.

But not in WA, where the only daily newspaper and top-rating nightly news are influenced by another billionaire and fellow China enthusiast.

When Andrew Forrest presented the Victorian Consul-General to China at a federal government press conference on Wednesday, observers were stunned. Except those who live in Western Australia, where kowtowing to the Chinese government is presented as normal.

Having heard that Health Minister Greg Hunt was hosting a press conference with the WA iron ore magnate, I sat down to watch and record the circus.

Not only did Mr Forrest invite Consul-General Long Zhou as a guest, he introduced him at the podium, where Mr Long proceeded to address the media. Hunt was reportedly blindsided by the stunt. He certainly looked uncomfortable.

Shocked by the seemingly audacious move, the nation's media sprang into action. I found that reaction a relief.

Because this was not the first time that Mr Forrest had acted in this way. But it's the first time the rest of the nation has seen it.

On April 1 (yes, April Fool's Day), in announcing the "procurement" of Personal Protective Equipment from China, "Twiggy" Forrest joined the WA Minister for Health Roger Cook at a press conference. Mr Forrest's special guest was China's Consul-General in WA, Madam Dong.

The fact that a representative of the Chinese government was not only present but spoke at a WA government press conference barely caused a ripple.

Instead, Mr Forrest was lauded by the WA Health Minister for his intervention in securing the PPE in a competitive environment, with the agreement that he would be reimbursed by the taxpayer.

The exercise earned him a glowing front page the following day. A week later, Mr Forrest had the temerity to tell local radio "There's been a bit of banter saying, you know, oh there's these business people, these bad, bad business people sending precious masks and PPE to China in January and February. Well mate, I'm guilty as charged. I did that too. That was when they were in the middle of their worst crisis. Now, I sent hundreds of thousands of products over there," he crowed.

Mr Forrest's argument was that the favour was repaid many times over. "These guys are just heroic" he gushed.

They're also part of an autocratic regime that oppresses, "re-educates", blackmails and kills dissenters. Beijing attempted to silence doctors including the late Li Wenliang, who was censored when he tried to warn about the dangers of the frightening new virus in Wuhan in December.

But Mr Forrest is not alone when it comes to extolling the virtues of the communist regime.

Author of Silent Invasion: China's Influence In Australia, Professor Clive Hamilton refers to WA's network of business people and political leaders as Perth's "China Club". And with good reason. He told journalist Nathan Hondros that: "Western Australia seemed to be particularly prone to political influence through the business community and through political leaders who've been cultivated over many years." The rich and powerful in WA have ensured that the soft power of Beijing enjoys the warm embrace of media allies and government in the state.

Opinion editorials praising China are par for the course. Madam Dong has written at least two.

Criticism of the regime is, at best, muted.

On Thursday, right on cue, the West Australian's front page ran a photograph of Seven West Media's Chairman Kerry Stokes under the headline DOLLARS AND SENSE.

Splashed over three pages, the billionaire called for the Commonwealth to appease China, warning that, "Australia's prosperity was in jeopardy if Beijing's anger was left unchecked". The paper stated: "Mr Stokes said it was not sensible for Australia to 'poke our biggest provider of income in the eye'." Beijing's anger? How about the rest of us? Globally, COVID-19 has claimed the lives of more than 230,000 people, and while the loss of life in Australia has been limited to 93 poor souls, the hit to our economy and way of life has been disastrous.

Wages have been slashed, and hundreds of thousands have lost their jobs. More than one million people are on JobSeeker or the dole, and 540,000 employers have applied for the JobKeeper subsidy covering an estimated 3.3 million workers.

The effect of the pandemic emanating from China is devastating. The Prime Minister is right to want an independent inquiry into the origins of the virus.

But Mr Forrest and Mr Stokes argue that any investigation should be delayed and take place after the US election in November.

If tracing its genesis can help guard against future pandemics, surely expediency is warranted.

The fallout from Wednesday's press conference, including The West's front page, should raise serious questions about the dissemination of news and the wielding of influence in Western Australia's constrained media.Jane Marwick is a broadcaster and commentator.
---
ZIMBABWEANS tend not to be rugby league fans but when Queensland coach Brad Thorn described his team's defence against the Melbourne Rebels as "Originesque", the man responsible for it, Michael Todd, fully understood he was being highly praised.

Thorn, despite having won the 2011 World Cup with the All Blacks, doesn't have a whole lot of history with Australian rugby.

So when asked to compare the Reds' Super Rugby AU display against the Rebels - when they made 143 tackles to nine in the second half against Melbourne but didn't concede a point - all Thorn could do was to liken it to the defence of the great Queensland State of Origin teams he once played with during his years in league.

"You can't describe it except saying 'Queenslander'," said Thorn, reviving Billy Moore's history-making exhortation to the Maroons as they filed down the tunnel as underdogs for a 1995 Origin match.

Todd has been to a State of Origin match and knew the history of the rivalry. So he was well aware Thorn was doling out his highest praise.

But Todd, who migrated to Australia in 2009 after two years earlier having represented Zimbabwe at rugby's Junior World Cup in Ireland, never expected to find his name being spoken so reverently.

When the COVID-19 pandemic struck, Todd found himself answering an SOS from Thorn to take over the defence coaching role.

"It's been a pleasant experience but a steep learning curve," Todd said. "I wouldn't say we are doing too much different. We have just tried to simplify it. We know it is going to be a short tournament so we just try to do all the simple things really well, as well as play for each other." JULIAN LINDEN' SUPER RUGBY AU TEAM OF THE WEEK 15. Jack Maddocks (Waratahs), 14. James Ramm (Waratahs), 13. Kyle Godwin (Western Force), 12. Hamish Stewart (Reds), 11. Filipo Daugunu (Reds), 10. James O'Connor (Reds), 9. Jake Gordon (Waratahs), 8. Brynard Stander (Western Force), 7. Michael Hooper (Waratahs), 6. Liam Wright (Reds), 5. Lukhan Salakaia-Loto (Reds), 4. Matt Philip (Rebels), 3. Pone Fa'amausili (Rebels), 2. Tom Horton (Waratahs), 1. Cameron Orr (Rebels).
---
The death sentence on an Australian drug smuggler is just part of Beijing's campaign against democracies

Did the Chinese Communist Party instruct a court in Guangzhou to impose the death sentence on an alleged Australian drug smuggler as part of its campaign to pressure our government into kowtowing to it?

We'll never know the answer, but the fact we are uncomfortably speculating about it is what Beijing wants.

It could be payback. We know that China's justice system is often used by Communist Party bosses to punish their political enemies. During the COVID-19 pandemic, a number of crazy-brave critics of President Xi Jinping have spoken out, with one calling him "a clown with no clothes on who was still determined to play emperor".

They have all disappeared, sucked into the dark world of China's secret prison system where mistreatment and torture are commonplace.

So the sentencing of Karm Gilespie may be one more punishment in Beijing's program of retaliation against Australia after our foreign minister Marise Payne proposed an independent international inquiry into the origin of the coronavirus and the response to it.

Beijing has slashed our barley and beef exports and is using its control over the media to convince Chinese people that Australia is such a racist country that it's too dangerous to come here.

The tourism and education industries expect to suffer. Who is next on Beijing's hit list?

When in 2018 Canada, acting on a US extradition request, arrested a top Huawei executive Beijing flew into a rage. It bullied Ottawa relentlessly. It imposed trade sanctions. And it arrested on trumped up charges two Canadians travelling in China.

Michael Spavor and Michael Kovrig have been rotting in China's jails ever since, bargaining chips in Beijing's nasty game.

Now that we are in the bad books, should Australians in China be nervous that they too may become collateral damage?

HONG KONG TAKEOVER The people of Hong Kong understand how terrifying the Chinese regime can be. That's why there's deep anxiety about Beijing's plans to impose a new national security law on the former British territory.

The law, along with the introduction of mainland security and intelligence agencies, would likely spell the end of Hong Kong's political freedoms.

There will be a crackdown on free speech. The courts will no longer be independent. Educating children about democratic values and universal human rights will be replaced with lessons in Xi Jinping Thought.

All of which explains why Britain is preparing for the possibility that up to three million Hongkongers will want to migrate there.

Australia too can expect a flood of residency applications from worried Hongkongers escaping their new -oppressors.

We should welcome them with open arms. For the most part, they will make excellent citizens because they will have a strong commitment to human rights and democratic freedoms, perhaps more so than the average Australian, who is inclined to take those freedoms for granted and doesn't understand the serious threat posed by the Chinese Communist Party.

Tens of thousands, or even hundreds of thousands, of Hongkongers will also bring much-needed skills and cultural treasures.

In my new book, Hidden Hand: How the Chinese Communist Party Is Reshaping The World, co-authored with Mareike Ohlberg, we describe how the Communist Party insinuates itself into Chinese diaspora communities like Australia's to gain influence and to mobilise some to work in China's interests.

It does so with inducements, threats and the exploitation of patriotic sentiment towards "the motherland".

One great benefit for Australia from an influx of Hongkongers committed to freedom and opposed to the Communist Party is that it would make it more difficult for the party to engage in its "united front" influence activities in this country. Hongkongers know how the party operates.

And it would destroy the argument of Beijing's sympathisers in this country who accuse CCP critics of being motivated by racism and Sinophobia. A few Chinese-Australians speak out already, but with an influx from Hong Kong we would see many more speaking out against CCP influence here and against oppression in Hong Kong, Xinjiang, Tibet and the mainland.

After the 1989 Tiananmen Square Massacre, when CCP hardliners sent in the tanks to crush students calling for greater freedoms and democracy in China, Prime Minister Bob Hawke famously announced that the government would allow 42,000 Chinese students in Australia to stay. Most did and went on to become citizens, with many also bringing family members.

But there are lessons to be learned from Bob Hawke's decision. One is that China's security -services and "united front" agents will try hard to intimidate and silence the new arrivals, including threatening their families and business interests in Hong Kong and the Chinese -mainland.

The Australian government has been slow to protect Australian citizens of Chinese heritage from surveillance and intimidation by Beijing's notorious security agencies, like the Ministry of State Security.

And not only citizens of Chinese heritage. Last month we learned that Mack Horton's family endured a two-year campaign of terror after Mack called out Chinese swimmer Sun Yang as a drug cheat. The threats and harassment only stopped in February when Sun Yang was banned from swimming for eight years.

Around the world, the CCP is promoting China's authoritarian system of government as superior to the West's liberal democracy.

Democracy has its faults - just look at the United States today. But only those with a slave mentality would rather live under Chinese Communist Party rule. Clive Hamilton is professor of public ethics at Charles Sturt University in Canberra.
---
China threatens Oz wine exporters as Wuhan parties on

CHINA has hit Australian winemakers with a "deeply troubling" anti-dumping investigation threatening $1bn in wine exports while the post-coronavirus party rages on at ground zero in Wuhan.

Battered by drought, bushfires and now COVID-19, NSW winemakers were yesterday in shock after Beijing accused them of flooding the Chinese market, a claim the federal Government has vowed to fight.

And salt was rubbed in wounds for local businesses struggling to survive coronavirus restrictions yesterday when pictures emerged of thousands of Chinese people enjoying a pool party and performers in the very city that gave the world the pandemic.

China's Commerce Ministry announced a one-year -investigation to assess if Australian exporters are dumping bottled wine into the Chinese market, and may explore claims of unfair government subsidies. It follows Chinese tariffs on Australian barley and bans on beef shipments from several producers.

Trade Minister Simon Birmingham said the accusations were "deeply troubling and quite perplexing".

"Australian wine is by no means subsidised, it is by no means sold at or below anything other than market rates in the world market," he said.

"Our government will stand with the Australian wine industry to uphold their integrity and hard-earned reputation for producing wines in high demand throughout the world." About 37 per cent of all wine exported from Australia ends up in China, generating more than $1.07bn a year.

Richard Harkham of Hark-ham Wines exports boutique wines to Hong Kong and said he hoped China did not -impose tariffs on Australian product.

"It's very sad and all a very political tit-for-tat which I think is unfair. I hope this is just a threat. The wine industry has had a tough time," Mr Harkham said.

"About 95 per cent of my grapes were damaged this year because of the smoke haze from the fires. We've had no tourism because of the bushfires and then corona-virus happened." Mr Harkham said he had no plans to export to the mainland Chinese market in the future due to the volatile business landscape.

Hunter Valley winemaker Bruce Tyrrell, of Tyrrell's Wines, said China's investigation would not only hurt Australians but also Chinese businesses who owned wineries in the region.

"China is our biggest market. There are a growing number of wineries and vineyards that are Chinese-owned … so they would be hurting their own people," he said.

Mr Tyrrell said it was possible the attack on the wine industry was retaliation for the Australian government seeking an inquiry into China's handling of COVID-19.

"This is the way China does business; they did it to the barley guys for no reason. We will be exactly the same," he said.

New England Nationals MP Barnaby Joyce said it was hypocritical of Beijing to point the finger at Australia as a source of its economic hardship when the world was suffering due to the -pandemic.

"China's economy and the world's economy would be in a lot better place if the Chinese Government had been … honest in their information and response in the first -instance of the outbreak," he said.

Mr Joyce said the wine dumping claim was a "rubbish" excuse for what was clearly a political move.

"There's no point playing this sort of childish game, it's better to come out and say we're angry because you're not treating us with respect." As Australia is forced to deal with the latest economic threat from China, revellers in Wuhan are acting as if the pandemic is long over with thousands packing into a pool party. The images of people squeezed together are in stark contrast to Sydney's pools which sit virtually empty amid the COVID restrictions.

In the city the Boy Charlton Pool is closed, while at Bondi Icebergs a 24 person limit has been imposed.

Institute of Public Affairs executive director John Roskam said the fact life -appeared to be "returning to normal" in Wuhan showed how disastrous Australia's position was by comparison.

"Australia made the right decision" to pursue the -inquiry into the origins of the coronavirus," he said.

China's handling of the outbreak originating in Wuhan has been continually criticised by high level officials in the US.

Last week US Health Secretary Alex Azar used a controversial visit to Taiwan to issue a scathing assessment of the Chinese Communist Party's response in Wuhan.

"For a month-and-a-half they delayed allowing outside experts in to learn more about the nature of the disease," he said. "(China) should have disclosed the asymptomatic carriage and transmission of the disease (sooner)." In April China's ambassador to Australia Cheng Jingye warned the government its pursuit of a coronavirus inquiry could set off a boycott by Chinese consumers, who may not buy major exports including beef and wine. China then slapped an 80 per cent tariff on Australian barley exports after accusing growers of dumping into the market. Australia strongly -denies the claim.
---
DEPUTY US National Security Advisor Matthew Pottinger has doubled down on the -theory that COVID-19 leaked from a Chinese government-run lab in Wuhan.

Pottinger, a staunch critic of Beijing, allegedly made the claim in a recent Zoom meeting with British officials.

"There is a growing body of evidence that the lab is likely the most credible source of the virus," Pottinger reportedly said, according to the UK Daily Mail.

Pottinger advanced the -theory as the European Union made a new investment deal with China last week despite protests from Pottinger and hesitance from the incoming Biden administration.

Pottinger was one of the first US officials to raise alarms about the origins of the virus back in January 2020. He -ordered intelligence agencies to search for evidence that it had leaked from a Chinese lab.

A Chinese virologist who said she did some of the earliest research on COVID-19 has publicly claimed COVID-19 was man-made, and that the Chinese government covered up its dangers. Western medical experts have discredited the theory.

The World Health Organisation has been investigating the source of the virus, but so far it is believed that Patient Zero has not been found.

Pottinger suggested in the recent call with British officials that the WHO probe is a ruse.

"MPs around the world have a moral role to play in exposing the WHO investigation as a Potemkin exercise," Pottinger told the parliamentarians, referring to fake villages created in Crimea in the 18th Century to convince the visiting Russian Empress the region was in good health.

"Even establishment figures in Beijing have openly dismissed the wet market story," Pottinger allegedly said, referring to another theory the virus was transmitted from animals to humans in a wildlife market in Wuhan where the first cluster of cases emerged.

Chinese government officials have rejected the US claims. NY POST
---
Chinese diplomats have a tradition of avoiding offence. They are known for delicacy and tact, even beyond usual diplomatic demands.

Deputy head of mission at the Chinese Embassy, Minister Wang Xining, yesterday did his level best to destroy that image during a speech at Canberra's National Press Club.

Wang, China's version of Iraq's famously fact-averse Comical Ali, alternated in his speech between pure fiction and a drama queen level of self-pity.

The maladroit diplomat claimed Australia's call for an independent review into the origins of the coronavirus "hurt the feelings" of the Chinese people.

"At latest count COVID-19 has killed 800,000 people worldwide and caused economic disruption on a scale not seen since the Great Depression," Dave Sharma, the Member for Wentworth, responded "If getting to the bottom of what caused this generates some 'hurt feelings', I think that is the least of our concerns." Wang said Australia's call for an investigation was a "shocking proposal." Yet Australia's only aim is to learn exactly how the virus began and was spread. How shocking is that?

Wang also took issue with Australia identifying the city of Wuhan as the source of the -initial coronavirus outbreak.

Although Wang noted the virus was "first identified in China" and "first reported in China", he claimed that did not mean Wuhan was the source.

He said researchers should be given the space to "find out the origin". Maybe Wang and the Chinese government would -prefer it if researchers begin their search in Tenterfield, or perhaps the Blue Mountains.

Anywhere but Wuhan. Still, if Wang insists on researchers being allowed to seek the origin of the virus, we can make that a part of the independent review.

Elsewhere in his speech, Wang said China "respects Australia sovereignty". "As China's sovereignty was constantly under threat and -disarray from external powers, the last thing China wants to do is to inflict on others what China suffered," he said. "Or to bully others as we were bullied." Oh, please. Someone buy this bloke a laptop and boot up some recent footage from Hong Kong. Or some old footage from Tiananmen Square. China inflicts suffering on its own people. With the virus, it has taken that policy global.
---
PAUL Gallen and Mark Hunt are poised for a Halloween showdown. Details are being finalised for a boxing bout between the former NRL hardman and UFC knockout king.

Four venues are in the -running to stage the heavyweight trans-Tasman battle: Sydney's Qudos Bank Arena, Spark Stadium in Auckland, Newcastle's McDonald Jones -Stadium and Carrington Park in Bathurst.

Negotiations are at such an advanced stage that a proposed fight date of October 30 or 31 (Halloween) has been pencilled in.

Fight promoter Matt Rose confirmed the four venues were competing for the event. "This fight has attracted huge interest and will be a sellout wherever we decide to take the fight," Rose said.

"Gallen is an NRL legend and one of, if not the, toughest footballer in the last 20 years, and Mark Hunt is a UFC legend who hits harder than any fighter in the country.

"It's scary and makes for a perfect Halloween showdown. I hope to lock away the venue in the coming weeks before getting the final sign-off from both fighters." Ill feeling between the pair is high and speculation was rife earlier this year that Gallen could fight Hunt, who had signed a contract for the bout in March. However, the COVID-19 lockdown put a halt to talks.

Gallen, 38, has not yet signed a contract to fight 46-year-old Hunt, who had suggested Gallen was cowering away from the clash after he had signed on. However, the former NSW State of Origin enforcer hit back.

"Mate, you signed your contract today and you've released it and made it public," Gallen said. "How long did it take you to sign that contract? Three to four weeks, and you've made it public today that you've signed it and you expect me to make a decision today.

"You know how contracts work, they don't happen overnight. I've had my first conversation with the promoter about four o'clock this afternoon, you've had three or four weeks to get it done.

"Rest assured mate, I don't need any encouragement. We will get the deal done, and the fight will happen. Just give me a week and we'll see what happens." The coronavirus lockdown then stopped all plans for a live boxing event, and it appeared the bout may not happen. But the proposed fight date and narrowing of venues are the biggest signs the showdown will take place this year.

All four venues can host more than 20,000 spectators. Carrington Park hosted an Elton John concert earlier this year with that number.

This will be the biggest fight of Gallen's boxing career, and will have crossover interest from mixed martial arts fans given Hunt's storied career in the UFC. Hunt was released from his contract by the UFC 12 months ago, but is still in the middle of legal action against the organisation for allegedly allowing drug-cheating fighters to compete against him in the Octagon.
---
* KFC SuperCoaches will be given five trades for the upcoming Round 3, up from the normal two, to allow for changes in circumstances over the COVID-19 hiatus. The five-trade feature went live within the game on May 12.

* The overall number of 37 trades won't change despite the season being reduced from 25 to 20 rounds. This allows KFC SuperCoaches insurance against unforeseen issues (e.g. mass standing down of players).

* If users want to restart their draft league from scratch and do a redraft, they should contact Vapormedia directly (click "help" in the KFC SuperCoach game, then click "contact us").

* The KFC SuperCoach Stats free trial will be extended for another round (now finishes after Round 3), so make sure you check it out.

KFC SUPERCOACH CLASSIC * Team points for overall prizes and leagues to be carried over (no restart of points).

* Season reduced to 20 rounds in line with NRL (18 yet to be played). * Total of 37 trades to remain unchanged, five available ahead of round three (these five trades, if used, will come out of the 37 total). Essentially, Super Trade Week, which was originally scheduled for Round 15, has been brought forward as State of Origin will take place post-season and there are no bye rounds.

* At the end of Round 3, trades will move back to the usual two allowed per week.

* Bye rounds have been removed based on schedule expectation. * No change to 10- and 20-team league sizes, head-to-head game play to start in round three (as scheduled for 20-team leagues, to be implemented for 10-team leagues).

* Both league types play head to head (uneven draw) for rounds 3-16 (all rounds except the last four).

* Finals series to remain at four rounds - rounds 17-20.

* Player prices to be updated at the end of round three as previously scheduled.

KFC SUPERCOACH DRAFT * Leagues that extend beyond 20 rounds will be scaled back to fit within a 20-round season, including any finals series option as elected by any league.

* Skip bye rounds option has been removed to allow for maximum available rounds of game play, given there are no bye-impacted rounds expected under the revised fixture.

* Game play otherwise continues as usual. As per above, users can contact Vapormedia via the "contact us" form within KFC SuperCoach to redraft and restart leagues if they wish (which would void rounds 1 and 2).

IMPORTANT NOTES * The above changes are subject to any alterations to the proposed NRL schedule. * îThe changes are still to be reflected in the competition terms and conditions. * The changes, including the five-trade feature for the upcoming round, was implemented to the product on May 12.
---
VIRUS INQUIRY POWERFUL global leaders including the UK, Russia, India and Japan are among a coalition of 62 nations supporting Australia's call for an independent inquiry into the coronavirus ahead of a vote at the World Health Assembly.

The demand for an "impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation" of the international health response to COVID-19 is expected to be the most controversial motion in a draft resolution written by the European Union, due to be put to the Assembly tomorrow morning AEST. It tasks World Health Organisation director general Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus with launching the evaluation "at the earliest appropriate moment" to review the "lessons learned" from the deadly pandemic.

Senior Federal government sources said they do not expect China to oppose the inquiry.

One source said while it will not be known for sure until the motion is called tomorrow, it is believed Beijing will have little option but to support the inquiry given the overwhelming global support for it.

"The general view is that China is unlikely to oppose but we will know when the motion is called, particularly given that Africa is now supportive of and may even co sponsor," a senior source said.

Australia was an early supporter of the draft resolution, which, in addition to having the support of the EU's 27 member states, also has the backing of 35 other countries.

At least 100 nations have indicated support for the resolution, with the US urging others to back a COVID-19 inquiry despite not being a co-sponsor of the EU's draft motion, which does not mention the origins of the coronavirus. It does, however, call on the "actions of WHO and their timelines pertaining to the COVID-19 pandemic" to be among the issues examined.

It also does not set out a specific method for an inquiry, suggesting using "existing mechanisms" for review as an option. The review would then make recommendations to "improve global pandemic prevention, preparedness, and response capacity".

Foreign Affairs Minister Marise Payne said there was "positive support" for an independent review into the pandemic to help the world "learn the lessons necessary to protect global health".

"This is about collaborating to equip the international community to better prevent or counter the next pandemic and keep our citizens safe," Ms Payne said. "Australia and a significant number of countries are co-sponsoring the EU-led resolution, which includes a call for an impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation, to be presented at this week's World Health Assembly meeting." The resolution also calls for global co-operation and collaboration to step up at "all levels" to "contain, control and mitigate the COVID-19 pandemic". It specifically highlights a need to provide people with "reliable and comprehensive information" about the coronavirus and measures being taken by authorities in response to the pandemic.

With conspiracy theories and fake miracle cures for COVID-19 increasingly spreading online, the resolution asks that countries do more to counter the "malicious cyber activities" peddling this misinformation.

WHO'S ON BOARD Albania, Australia, Bangladesh, Belarus, Bhutan, Botswana, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, El Salvador, Guatemala, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Japan, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Mozambique, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Paraguay, Peru, South Korea, Moldova, Russian Federation, San Marino, Sierra Leone, South Africa.
---
Nine axes state cups WE have been critical in recent times of Channel 9's lack of commitment to rugby league - and here is another reason why.

The free-to-air network has abandoned its coverage of state cup football in NSW and Queensland in their recently renegotiated broadcast deal.

The Canterbury Cup and Intrust Super Cup are important pathway competitions to the NRL, in which clubs rely on sponsorship they can generate from the TV exposure.

The competitions have been abandoned this year because of COVID-19 but Nine has pulled out for the final two years of their contract in 2021 and 2022, blaming production costs.

Fox Sports will still cover the NSW comp. To save production costs, Canterbury Cup games could be scheduled as curtain-raisers to Fox League games where cameras and outside broadcast teams are already set up.

The QRL and the NRL are looking to set up a live-streaming service to ensure fans can stay tuned to their competition.

Dog off the leash THE Bulldogs' best player - lock Adam Elliott - is attracting interest from rival clubs, with his contract expiring at the end of the season.

And he is likely to delay a decision until he knows if Dean Pay will be coaching.

Elliott's partner Robyn recently gave birth to their first child and the 25-year-old is looking to set himself up with a long-term deal and a pay rise to justify the enormous improvement in his game.

"The Bulldogs have said they are about to put an offer to us," Elliott's manager David Riolo said. "He's happy there to a point but he'd like to see the roster improve.

"They've got some money but it depends how they plan to spend it."

Hunt v Gal confirmed THE much-anticipated Paul Gallen fight with UFC warrior Mark Hunt is back on again.

Both fighters have signed contracts and promoter Matt Rose is now waiting to lock in a venue for September. Qudos Arena at Sydney Olympic Park is the likely location.

Hunt will start a hot favourite with bookmakers to beat the old Sharks and Blues Origin legend over six three-minute rounds.

"I'll give him credit, he was a tough footballer," Hunt said. "But I don't think he knows what he has got himself into - it's not State of Origin. I punch people in the face for a living!

"I've been keeping myself in condition during the corona shutdown and as soon as we have a date, I'm ready to go. "And he's not gonna know what hit him once he feels my power."
---
THE COVID FILES OZ-FUNDED VIRUS PAPER USED MILITARY FACILITY

CHINA'S People's Liberation Army has been involved in scientific research, co-funded by the Australian government, into the origins of the coronavirus which has been published in esteemed medical journals.

In an explosive revelation, a study co-funded by the Australian Research Council and the Chinese government, and trumpeted by The University of Sydney as helping to solve the puzzle of how COVID-19 transferred from animals to humans, relied on a key laboratory in an institute in the People's Liberation Army's Academy of Military Medical Sciences to conduct its "genetic sequencing" and "virus isolation".

The director of the microbiology institute, Professor Wu-Chan Cao, who is thanked in the paper's acknowledgments for his "substantial contribution", has the rank of colonel and is a Wuhan Institute of Virology board member in a clear conflict of interest.

One of the study's co-authors, Yi-Gang Tong, began working in the same PLA-run microbiology institute in 2005.

The Wuhan Institute of Virology is at the centre of a global probe into whether the naturally-occurring coronavirus was accidentally released from its laboratory or came from a local wet market, which scientists believe is the most likely scenario.

This study is one of two scientific papers on the coronavirus undertaken by University of Sydney virologist and evolutionary biologist, Professor Edward Holmes in conjunction with researchers in China, who received funding from the Chinese government.

Professor Holmes is highly regarded in his field and the only western scientist that was part of the consortium of the Shanghai Public Health Clinical Centre and School of Public Health who first uploaded the genetic sequence of the coronavirus on January 11.

There is no suggestion that Professor Holmes' own contribution to the research project was anything but independent, ethical and of the highest scientific standards. His work on the papers was funded by Australian grants only.

His February 2020 study looked at whether an animal called a pangolin - and not only bats - could be an intermediate host of the coronavirus to facilitate its transfer to humans.

ARMY FACILITIES Professor Holmes has used this research to call for a ban on wet markets and the trade in wildlife.

The study titled "Identifying SARS-CoV-2 related coronaviruses in Malayan pangolins" was completed and submitted by February 7, 2020 and it was peer-reviewed and published in Nature online on March 26.

"Although bats are likely reservoir hosts for SARS-CoV-2, the identity of any intermediate host that might have facilitated transfer to humans is unknown," the study states in its summary. "Here we report the identification of SARS-CoV-2 relate coronaviruses in Malayan pangolins seized in anti-smuggling operations in southern China." The Daily Telegraph can reveal that the "sequencing" and "virus isolation" on which the study relied was done by laboratories run by the PLA in China.

In fine print at the very end of the paper in the acknowledgments section, it states: "We thank Prof. Wu-Chun Cao, Dr. Na Jia, Dr. Ya-Wei Zhang, Dr. Jia-Fu Jiang, Dr. Bao-Gui Jiang, and their team in State Key Laboratory of Pathogen and Biosecurity, Beijing Institute of Microbiology and Epidemiology, Beijing for their substantial contributions to this study, including co-ordinating among research parties, conducting virus isolation, qPCR and sequencing." The State Key Laboratory of Pathogen and Biosecurity is part of the Beijing Institute of Microbiology and Epidemiology, which sits under the Academy of Military Medical Sciences.

The Academy of Military Sciences is the highest-level research institute of the People's Liberation Army.

RANKING RESEARCHER The director of the Beijing Institute is Professor Wu-Chan Cao, who also received the top acknowledgment in the research paper for his "substantial contributions to this study" including "co-ordinating among research parties".

In his official biography he is pictured in his military uniform and it states he has the "rank of colonel".

"Now the director of the Institute of Microbiology and epidemiology, Military Medical Science Academy of the PLA, director of the State Key Laboratory of pathogen and Biosecurity," it states.

Colonel Cao also sits on the board for the Wuhan Institute of Virology's Scientific Advisory Committee of Centre for Emerging Infectious Diseases, according to its website.

A University of Sydney spokeswoman said Professor Holmes' work was "academically independent" and that he had not received any research or personal funding from the Chinese Government or Chinese companies or institutions.

"Where he has undertaken research with scientists from China his work has been funded by the Australian Research Council, the National Health and Medical Research Council and the University of Sydney," she said.

"We strongly defend the right of our researchers to collaborate with scientists around the world in line with all relevant Australian laws and government guidelines.

"Prof Holmes has no link with the Academy of Military Science. Their involvement with the research was declared in the acknowledgments, as is standard practice.

"Dr Cao co-ordinated the laboratory work before Prof Holmes' involvement. He did not direct or supervise the work of Prof Holmes which was undertaken independently." The University of Sydney website states: "Professor Holmes, a co-author, is the only non-China based academic on the paper." Another co-authored paper by Professor Holmes, published in Cell, provides commentary on samples taken from the Wuhan wet market and states "not all of the early (COVID-19) were market associated, it is possible that the emergence story is more complicated than first suspected".

This was cited in a press release by the Embassy of the People's Republic of China in the Commonwealth in Australia that criticised media coverage "playing up the so-called wet market in China".

WORRYING LINKS Charles Sturt University Professor of Public Ethics Clive Hamilton supported the calls for an oversight agency by Morrison government MPs.

While there was no doubting the honesty and professionalism of Australian researchers, legitimate questions should be asked as to the involvement of the Chinese military.

"It's clear that the universities are not properly overseeing the kinds of collaborations that their scientists are undertaking because there are many instances of sensitive research in Australian universities being done in collaboration with Chinese scientists with links to China's military or who are likely passing valuable information on to China's companies or intelligence -services," he said.

"Universities have been very reluctant to admit there is a problem and have consistently hidden behind the Defence Trade Controls Act which prohibits the export of sensitive technology but does not prohibit Chinese military scientists working on sensitive projects in Australian laboratories."The Australian Strategic Policy Institute's analysis of Chinese institutions has designated the Academy of Military Science very high risk as the PLA's premier institution for military science. It is -responsible for leading and co-ordinating military science for the whole military.
---
Dean Pay's future at Canterbury must be decided one way or another before doubt becomes massively damaging A CANTERBURY board meeting on Thursday night will tell us how much the Bulldogs believe in their head coach Dean Pay.

And how much he believes in them.

Pay's coaching future isn't listed as an agenda item, but let's all accept there will be a late reshuffle to the line-up.

After 20 months as head coach, the time has come for the Bulldogs hierarchy to either back Pay long term, or go in another direction.

In March 2019, Pay was given an additional 12-month extension to his contract, taking him through until this coming November.

It was hardly an act of assuredness.

The deal for Pay to stay until the end of this season was sold by management as "showing the faith".

I would argue the short-term deal said more about Pay's commitment to the club he first joined 31 years ago than that of Canterbury's.

And it's a commitment, too, that he has doubled down on in recent months without so much as a snigger.

Pay is the only coach in the NRL still earning just 60 per cent of his salary as a result of the club's COVID-19 financial cutbacks.

Without intending to embarrass the 51-year-old, Pay is the lowest-paid coach in the game - earning less than a large percentage of his players.

And here we are, with the club back under the spotlight and with ever-present speculation over their coach.

Management will tell you their decision "to see a bit more" isn't about Pay as a man, who they respect and like, but a case of wanting to see an upward trend in performance and recruitment even though everyone at the club knew the rebuild after Des Hasler's departure in 2017 would take closer to four years.

Another option is that Pay walks.

It's advice he's received by more than a few in recent weeks - but has refused to consider for the sake of his players and his 24/7 desire to turn Canterbury's roster into the year-on-year finals team he believes they can be.

Thankfully, there's more than a few influential figures inside The Kennel who know the weekly dance-off with the press over Pay and his potential replacement has run its course.

If last Friday was about a carefully worded statement to deny any link by the club to Craig Bellamy - yet strategically also made no mention of Pay's name - next week we can expect a statement about Wayne Bennett.

If you listen to the whispers along Canterbury Road, Bennett wouldn't mind joining a club flush with funds and working with the like-minded Andersons - who walk into work with a narrow focus on one thing: their club.

IN a perfect world, the Bulldogs roll through the struggling Sharks tonight and everyone from marketing to sponsorship at Belmore turn up tomorrow morning and, before making a cup of tea, paper over the cracks that will remain under the surface until management makes a clear call on the only off-contract coach in the NRL.

Uncertainty feeds doubt - and doubt is now seeping into the last place any footy club wants, the Bulldogs dressing room, where 11 players are off-contract but with no idea if their coach will be at the club beyond 2020.

And if not Pay, then who?

The revolution of the Canberra Raiders under Ricky Stuart makes no sense to Cronulla and Parramatta fans.

But the decision by Stuart - one of Pay's great mates - to quit his two former clubs has contributed to his current success.

Lacking stability and consistent support from above, he had the bottle to walk away from the Sharks in 2010 after four years and the Eels in 2013 after one year.

The Sharks and Eels shared a likeness in their distinct lack of structure and dysfunctional leadership at board level - determining factors Stuart can't recognise at the Raiders, who boast one of the most connected, authoritative and collaborative boards in Australian sport.

THE decision by the Bulldogs football committee to overrule Pay's desire to sign Josh Reynolds isn't the be all and end all, but it illustrates the conflict at the club of making decisions for now - and for the future.

The former NSW Origin five-eighth and club favourite was prepared to return to the Berries for the paltry price of $100,000 for what remains of this season.

Knowing the value, experience and passion Reynolds could bring to the Dogs, Pay was keen to sign the Wests Tigers playmaker in a bid to shock-start Canterbury's return from COVID-19 suspension three weeks ago.

The football committee disagreed, citing a focus on investing in next-generation half Jake Averillo, while also reluctant to add another half to their salary cap that is already paying Kieran Foran, Lachlan Lewis, Brandon Wakeham and Jeremy Marshall-King.

It's a fair argument by the committee - and one Pay would no doubt agree with if he knew he was at the helm of the team beyond this season.

But he's not.

Instead, he's chasing wins to prove himself to the Canterbury board and looking at players, such as Reynolds, who can assist his climb north on the NRL ladder. It's a flawed model derived from doubt and uncertainty, and only the Canterbury board can fix it. Starting Thursday.
---
THE VOCID FILES VIRUS ORIGINS TWO Chinese scientists - who western intelligence agencies are looking into as part of their probe into the origins of the global coronavirus contagion - studied live bats in Australia in research jointly funded by the Australian and Chinese governments.

An investigation by The Daily Telegraph can reveal the Five Eyes intelligence agencies of Australia, Canada, NZ, UK and US, are understood to be looking closely at the work of a senior scientist at the Wuhan Institute of Virology, Peng Zhou, as they examine whether COVID-19 originated from a wet market or whether the naturally--occurring virus may have been released from the level four laboratory in Wuhan that was studying deadly coronavirus pathogens from bats.

The revelation comes as Australian politicians ramp up pressure on China to co--operate with an international investigation into the origins of the COVID-19 outbreak.

Chair of the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security, Andrew Hastie said: "The Chinese Communist Party must take responsibility for the virus that began inside their borders and work with the rest of the world to prevent it from happening again. We are simply asking for transparency and co-operation." The Australian government's position is the virus most likely originated from the Wuhan wet markets but it is possible it was accidentally released from a laboratory.

It can be revealed that Zhou - the head of the Bat Virus Infection and Immunity Project at the Wuhan Institute of Virology - spent three years at the bio-containment facility, Australian Animal Health Laboratory between 2011 and 2014, where he was sent by China to complete his doctorate.

During this time, Zhou arranged for wild-caught bats to be transported alive by air from Queensland to the Australian Animal Health Laboratory in Victoria where they were euthanised for dissection and studied for deadly viruses.

His work was funded jointly by the CSIRO and the Chinese Academy of Sciences. It examined bat immunology and the role of interferons and how "bats are rich reservoirs for emerging viruses, including many that are highly pathogenic to humans and other mammals" and "many of which cause significant morbidity and mortality in humans and other mammals."

HIGHLY-RISKY WORK The research is designed to prevent the next pandemic by understanding how viruses can be transmitted from bats to humans to cause coronaviruses. But the work is considered highly risky and there have been fears in recent years that any inadvertent leak could cause a worldwide pandemic.

The other scientist being looked at is Shi Zhengli, who is the director of the Centre for Emerging Infectious Diseases at the Chinese Academy of Sciences' Wuhan Institute of Virology. Zhengli also spent time in Australia as a visiting scientist for three months from February 22 to May 21, 2006 where she worked at the CSIRO's top-level Australian Animal Health Laboratory.

She used faecal samples of horseshoe bats to identify that they were the natural host for SARS-like coronaviruses.

When the COVID-19 outbreak occurred in Wuhan, Zhengli said she had sleepless nights worrying whether it was released from her laboratory - but has since strongly denied this occurred.

The Daily Telegraph does not suggest the two scientists are responsible for the outbreak or spread of COVID-19, but merely that they have come to the attention of intelligence agencies.

On November 18 last year, shortly before the outbreak, Zhou posted a postdoctoral recruitment notice looking for one or two candidates to study the "unique mechanism of innate immunity in bats." In it, according to a translation done by The Daily Telegraph, Zhou offered the opportunity for "academic exchanges and research at home and abroad".

The CSIRO and the Australian Animal Health Laboratory have collaborated with China in numerous jointly-funded research projects into bat diseases, with scientists travelling back and forth between the two laboratories.

WARNINGS ON LAB The research into bats and coronaviruses at the Wuhan Institute of Virology has been considered high-risk amid concerns about the practices at the laboratory.

A "Sensitive but Unclassified" cable, dated January 19, 2018, obtained by The Washington Post, revealed that US embassy scientists and diplomats in Beijing visited the laboratory and met with Zhengli.

They sent warnings back to Washington about inadequate safety practices and management weaknesses as it conducted research on coronaviruses from bats. According to the Post, the cable "warns that the lab's work on bat coronaviruses and their potential human transmission represented a risk of a new SARS-like pandemic".

"During interactions with scientists at the WIV laboratory, they noted the new lab has a serious shortage of appropriately trained technicians and investigators needed to safely operate this high-containment laboratory," the cable stated.

A CSIRO spokesman said it had partnered with China in "excellent research and development for over 40 years".

"While there is no current research on bats at ACDP, the suggestion bat research is dangerous without context … is misleading and irresponsible," he said. "Research into bats underpins much of our understanding of zoonotic diseases. CSIRO undertakes due diligence and takes security very seriously."

PROBE MUST OCCUR The US Ambassador to Australia, Arthur B. Culvahouse Jr. told The Daily Telegraph the origins of the outbreak need to be investigated, adding that the phone call between Donald Trump and Scott Morrison on April 22 showed there is "no daylight" between the US and Australia's position on a probe.

"I commend Foreign Minister (Marise) Payne and her call for a hard, dispassionate look at the origins of the epidemic," he said. "This isn't about pointing fingers. It is about what could have been done better to prevent the disease, communicate its existence and prevent it from becoming a global pandemic.

"Sadly, this won't be the last novel virus the world faces. To do better in the future, we will need to fully understand what happened in the past. I fully support (the) calls for transparency and accountability from (Australia)."

PART TWO TOMORROW: The cost of coronavirus

WHO'S WHO IN WUHAN PENG ZHOU Number two in the 'bat unit' at the Wuhan Institute of Virology. July 2011 until July 2014: Worked at the Australian Animal Health Laboratory and Biosecurity Business Unit.

* Zhou was sent to the Australian Animal Health Laboratory and Biosecurity Business Unit by China to complete doctorate.

* At the Unit he arranged for wild-caught bats to be moved alive from southern Queensland to Victoria where they were euthanised and studied.

* This work was funded jointly by the CSIRO and the Chinese Academy of Sciences. * The research was designed to prevent a pandemic by understanding how viruses can be transmitted from bats to humans to cause coronaviruses.

SHI ZHENGLI Director of the Centre for Emerging Infectious Diseases at the Chinese Academy of Sciences' Wuhan Institute of Virology.

February 22 - May 21, 2006: Visiting scientist in Australia working at the CSIRO's top-level Australian Animal Health Laboratory.

* At the CSIRO she used faecal samples of horseshoe bats to identify that they were a natural host for SARS-like coronavirus.

* When COVID-19 broke out in Wuhan she worried it was released from her laboratory but has since strongly denied this occurred.

November 18 2019 Zhou posted a postdoctoral requirements notice looking for candidates to study the "unique mechanism of innate immunity in bats" - offering academic exchanges and research at home and abroad.* The United States embassy scientists and diplomats met Zhengli at the laboratory and sent warnings back to Washington, dated January 19 2018, about inadequate safety practices for research being conducted on bats.
---
Confidential looks back on a COVID-ruled 2020 and the stars behind the year's biggest headlines

Any pretty face can book a job, says Sydney-based model Georgia Fowler - but only a pro can build a career.

And the Kiwi-born stunner would know. The latter half of 2020 has turned into a seminal era for the 27-year-old who has become one of the world's most in-demand models seemingly overnight, booking lucrative campaigns for Louis Vuitton, Topshop, Victoria Secret, Fendi, Dior, Burberry and Cartier in the space of just a few months.

It is a purple patch that has also rocketed the catwalk queen to the top of the international money list, with her estimated 2020 earnings inching the $1 million mark.

The key to her success, she tells Confidential, lies in the work ethic she inherited from her former golf pro dad Peter Fowler.

"I'm a really persistent person and I think that is in my blood a little bit. My dad was a pro golfer and he was famous for being the first one on the practice course and the last one off it," says Fowler.

"But I also think it comes from being in the game for nearly 12 years. Brands and clients really know me now and photographers know that I am going to work hard.

"Any beautiful face can book one job but it's the re-bookings that make your career."

DINING DO-OVER THE surge of COVID-19 in March saw Sydney's dynamic dining scene brought to its knees as restaurants shuttered one-by-one and business owners were left wondering if they would ever recover.

However, with crisis came ingenuity as many top eateries - from cafes to fine diners - were re-imagined. Pubs became grocery stores, bakeries sold toilet paper and white-table cloth restaurants sent their armies of black-tie waiters out into the streets on mopeds as high-end food and cocktail delivery drivers.

It was Sydney's culinary spirit writ large and, as business now returns to normal, will be remembered as a true phoenix from the ashes moment.

"Eight months since this all started business is better for us than it has ever been," says Darryl Martin, whose Marrickville eatery Bazaari was transformed from a high-end diner to a thriving takeaway and delivery service during the shutdown.

"Compared to where we were a year ago business is up 200 per cent. Now things are back to normal we have done away with the delivery side of things but we are still doing a truckload of takeaways which is a revenue stream we never had before.

"It has been rocky, don't get me wrong. But we have returned to being a stable business and for that we are very grateful."

HELLO HOLLYWOOD Kicking the pandemic's butt brought with it some unexpected but welcome windfalls for Australia - none more so than the unprecedented flood of Hollywood studios and streaming services who clamoured to relocate productions to our virtually COVID-free shores.

By August every major film and TV star, by way of Byron Bay, seemed to be alighting in Sydney to begin a backlog of blockbuster productions which continue to pump millions into the local film economy - Mark Wahlberg, Zac Efron, Idris Elba, Natalie Portman, Liam Neeson, Nicole Kidman, Melissa McCarthy and Chris Evans to name just a few.

In fact the boom, according to local set builder Greg Hadju who has 40 years of experience under his belt, is nothing short of an entertainment industry "gold rush" moment.

"There have been booms but this is definitely the biggest one in long time," says Hadju, who constructed the elaborate sets being used on - among other major productions - Thor: Love and Thunder and the upcoming $60 million George Miller epic Three Thousand Years of Longing.

"It is the first time I have ever been in the position where I have had to turn work away because I can't find the crews."

AND WHO COULD FORGET...

Broadway beckons for Farnsy: In news that falls under the banner of "what took so long", it was announced this year that the music of legendary Aussie crooner John Farnham will finally make it to the stage. Theatre impresario Michael Cassel (who is bringing Hamilton to the stage in Australia) will oversee the production which will not be based on Farnham's life but instead will be a fictional story set to a Farnham soundtrack.

SAS surprise: Channel 7 may have taken some hits at the start of the year - none more regrettable than the DOA turkey that was Plate of Origin. But the network came home strong this year with SAS: Australia which pitted a pile of celebs, including former Miss Universe Erin McNaught and rugby player Nick Cummins, against each other in a military endurance course and earned the network the year's best new reality concept. Movie-star romance: It was the unconventional love story we couldn't get enough of in 2020. Movie star Zac Efron swaps Hollywood for Byron Bay and subsequently falls for the local coffee shop waitress. Six months on the pair have weathered break-up rumours and continue to live the fairytale - giving hope to frustrated cafe workers everywhere.
---
TRADE tensions between China and Australia continue to ramp up with China threatening to slap tariffs on Australian barley - a move that could rip hundreds of millions of dollars from farmers.

The escalation came following calls by the Morrison government for an independent review into the origins of COVID-19.

Trade Minister Simon Birmingham said it was "deeply concerning". "We see no basis upon which the application of duties on to Australian barley producers in response to allegations of dumping or subsidisation could possibly be justified," he said.

China's Ambassador to Australia Cheng Jingye recently threatened that Australia would be hit with economic sanctions if Prime Minister Scott Morrison continued his push for the international inquiry into the origins of COVID-19.

An investigation has been underway in China for 18 months, looking into claims of dumping or subsidisation of Australian barley imports to China.

Minister Birmingham said there was "no basis" to the claim.He said he would be concerned if China was manipulating or incorrectly using anti-dumping laws, designed to stop imports that have been priced below fair market value.
---
Why it was more important to demonise anyone who agreed with Donald Trump's theory the virus came from a lab than to actually investigate whether he was right

Wait a second, this wasn't supposed to happen. We were all supposed to believe that the COVID-19 pandemic just sort of happened when someone slaughtered the wrong -animal too close to some other animal in Wuhan's notoriously gruesome "wet markets".

The idea that it may have been cooked up in a lab, even for legitimate purposes? The stuff of internet -loonies, we were told.

Yet how things change.

Evidence is now building that in fact the coronavirus was cooked up in the Wuhan Institute of Virology, with the idea now being endorsed by US deputy national security adviser -Michael Pottinger saying that there was "a growing body of evidence that the lab is likely the most credible source of the virus" - and that in -Beijing, "even establishment figures … have openly dismissed the wet market story".

This lends credence to the theory that the virus may have been created at the lab as part of legitimate scientific research that aims to cut up and recombine viruses in what are known as "gain of function" experiments -designed to predict how viruses might evolve - and thus better counter their threat should that occur.

But it's dangerous work. In 2014 a paper by scientists at Johns Hopkins University in the US called for a moratorium on such experiments, saying that "research that aims to create new potential pandemic pathogens … poses extraordinary potential risks to the public." You don't say.

Now, like the credibility of doctors who used to advertise cigarettes, the preferred media narrative that no way could the coronavirus have slipped through the gates at the Wuhan -Institute of Virology is falling apart.

And it hasn't been helped by China's response, blocking a World Health Organisation team from landing in Wuhan to investigate the pandemic's origins.

As the possibility that the pandemic is China's own Chernobyl, it's worthwhile looking back at just how this theory of COVID-19's origins has been dealt with in the leftist media.

After all, the idea that the virus -escaped some lab where these things were being tinkered with, for whatever purpose, was popular with Trump and his supporters, making it automatically suspect.

Recall that before the latest round of trade sanctions and social media attacks, hawkishness on China was seen as a thing for the sabre-rattling right.

For the respectable left, it was far better to treat the coronavirus as the natural but unfortunate outcome of Wuhan's exotic local food scene and make anyone who said otherwise out to be a war-hawk or a pariah.

To blame the communist state which, after all, was supposed to make us all wealthy while providing a counterbalance to a blustering America was unthinkable.

The ABC, naturally, led the charge to depict those who thought something fishy (or even batty, pardon the pun) was going on at the Wuhan -Institute of Virology as a swivel-eyed lunatic or, even worse, a Trump supporter. "Coronavirus may have come from a Chinese lab, if you believe -Donald Trump - but experts disagree", sneered the headline on a piece by reporter Alan Weedon on April 18 of last year.

Ah yes, where would we be without "experts"?

A month later, after Sharri Mark-son reported for the The Daily Telegraph that a US State Department dossier suggested links between the coronavirus outbreak and the Chinese facility, the ABC again swept into action to shoot the story down.

"The document contained no new evidence linking the laboratory to the outbreak and instead relied on publicly available news and scientific journal papers," the ABC's Dylan Welch wrote.

Not to be outdone, the ABC's Media Watch did not one but two hit pieces, one week apart, slamming the story as a "conspiracy theory" and -citing condemnations of the reporting by everyone from Gareth Evans to Bob Carr.

The same pattern was repeated in leftward-listing newsrooms around the world where for the past four years Donald Trump has been Enemy Number One.

The Los Angeles Times told readers in May that "Like the virus whose origin it purports to explain, the following conjecture refuses to die: The novel coronavirus was cooked up in a Chinese lab." A Washington Post "fact check" (yes, really) that same month looked at the question "Was the Wuhan coronavirus accidentally released from a Wuhan lab?" and came up with the answer "It's doubtful".

This, as they say, is not journalism. It's activism in plain sight, stemming from the simple equation that has governed so much of the news cycle for the past four years: If Trump says X, then not only must that X be false, it also must be driven into the ground and the earth above it salted so that nothing ever grows there again.

And it is pretty rich to see the ABC of all outlets getting all high and mighty about "conspiracy theories".

Recall that the billion-dollar broadcaster spent wheelbarrows of cash pushing the greatest conspiracy theory of all (still taken as an article of faith by many on the left), namely, that Donald Trump was somehow an agent of Moscow.

This saw taxpayers fork out for everything from the "Russia, Are You Listening?" podcast to special three-part Four Corners humbly titled, "The Story of the Century".

The great irony, of course, is that those on the left love to pride themselves on listening to facts and -experts and what is pretentiously known as "the science", while at the same time judging every piece of information's worth by whether or not it serves their narrative.

There is nothing political about a lab accident; they might happen anywhere scientists are working with these sorts of viruses. But there something deeply political, to say nothing of incredibly dangerous, about dismissing that possibility simply because it might vindicate the US president.
---
Some hung on, giving us desperate hope that they would finally hit the big screen as promised. But just this month James Bond's No Time To Die joined the ranks of movies put off until 2021, followed quickly by the remake of Dune, the sprawling science fiction story that could become the new Star Wars.

Since COVID-19 decided to ruin our lives in early 2020, dozens of blockbuster movies have been pushed back. All this at a time we need escapism more than ever.

So what's to be done? Well, one answer is to watch - or rewatch - the originals. Unfortunately, in the case of some of the titles we were waiting for such as Venom 2 and Ghostbusters, the original is not on any streaming platform. But Insider has found some great alternatives in our roundup of 10 great movies to watch at home while you wait for the sequel or the remake on the screens.

FAST AND FURIOUS 9 This was supposed to be out in May but has been shifted back until April next year. While you wait, catch up on the first six movies in the series - and the fun spin-off Hobbs And Shaw. Essentially, these movies do fall into a pattern and you'll get all the crazy car chases, the stunts, the women in revealing outfits and the quips from Dwayne "The Rock" Johnson you need to keep you going. Prepare to push your testosterone into the red zone.

Watch them on Foxtel WONDER WOMAN 1984 It has been shifted from June to October and then to Christmas Day. And the way things are going in Europe and America with COVID, Warner Bros is going to play Grinch and put it off even further. While you wait, check out the original Wonder Woman movie. It won't have the crazy costumes and music we were expecting from the 1980s but it's still a great movie. And I say that while wearing the Lasso of Truth.

Watch it on Foxtel A QUIET PLACE II This was about to be released when COVID hit. After being pushed back to September it's now back in April, which is set to be a busy month. The original is simply brilliant but isn't on any screening service. So why not jump onto Netflix and watch Bird Box instead? Different monsters, different rationale (in A Quiet Place you can't speak, in Bird Box you must not open your eyes) but it still slams your senses.

Watch it on Netflix

MINIONS: RISE OF GRU This was supposed to be the July kids movie of 2020. Now it'll be the July kids movie of 2021. The misadventures of the wacky minions will finally reveal how they came to work for Gru. Seeing as we still can't visit north Queensland, we can't chuckle at strange people who like to wear dungarees and talk gibberish. But you can still check out the original Minions and indeed the various Despicable Me movies.

Watch them on Foxtel

ETERNALS The blockbuster superhero movie that was meant to truly kick off phase four of the Marvel Universe. And quite probably launch a new superhero team into our consciousness.

 But Marvel has simply moved everything back a year. After initially being bounced to February, it's now slated for November 2021. Meanwhile, if you want to watch a superhero team origin movie, you can't go past The Avengers series. All four pack a punch.

Watch them on Disney

MONSTER HUNTER This was supposed to hit cinemas in September but it is yet another one bounced until April 2021. Seriously, that month is going to be so full of movies you need to clear your schedule now. Anyway, this video game reinvention sees Milla Jovovich again step into the role of an ass-kicking gorgeous heroine. Other than that, the title says it all. Monsters must be hunted. Don't expect philosophical insights, do enjoy the fights in tight costumes. Luckily that is also the essential ingredient in the Resident Evil series. Check out what I reckon was the best of them, the second one, Resident Evil: Apocalypse.

Watch it on Foxtel

TOP GUN MAVERICK This was primed for takeoff on December 23. Now it's been wheeled back into the hangar until July 2021. It's a sequel four decades in the making, so to say anticipation is sky-high is not an exaggeration. Luckily you can go back and check out the original, when Tom Cruise was just a fresh-faced sex symbol and you could admire his work without thinking about Scientology.

Watch it on Foxtel

GODZILLA VS KONG The king of the apes takes on the king of the lizards. We were all set to see this mighty battle go down in November but now we'll have to wait until May. How can Kong seriously take on a giant reptile that fires bolts of energy? The ape is smart but he's going to have to tool up or something. Check out why it sounds like an unfair fight by watching Godzilla: King Of Monsters. And it has more monsters than you can poke a stick at. A very big stick, at that.

Watch it on Foxtel

PETER RABBIT 2: THE RUNAWAY This was set to hop into cinemas in August but might pop out of its burrow in January. That's the plan at this stage but who knows if it'll be safe enough to return to the movies then.

 Expect more slapstick and cheeky jokes from James Corden as the voice of Peter, who took Beatrix Potter's genteel character and dragged his tail into the 21st century.

 Meanwhile, go back and check out the first one.

Watch it on Netflix

NO TIME TO DIE James Bond never let a deadly pandemic stop his mission. But it stopped his film. This is another one now slated for April 2021. This has been moved so many times, Daniel Craig seems to be having more farewell promotions than John Farnham.

  Anyway, while we wait and wait for this to come out, you have your pick of Bond movies, villains and indeed Bonds. Craig, Pierce Brosnan, Timothy Dalton, Roger Moore, George Lazenby or Sean Connery?

 The faces change but the double entendres stay the same. Watch them all on Stan
---
The facts about the communist regime in Beijing and the appalling way it allowed coronavirus to infect the whole world is apparent to all but the likes of Twiggy Forrest

How did Twiggy Forrest get to spin his craven kowtow to China into a public relations coup?

With the help of the Morrison government, that's who.

For starters, Forrest contributed to our dire shortage of surgical masks, and other vital personal protective equipment (PPE).

While China was hiding its COVID-19 crisis from the world, it was secretly hoovering up the world's supplies of PPE, leaving doctors and nurses dangerously exposed when the virus hit our shores.

We know two 90 tonne shipments of PPE, including millions of masks, were airfreighted to China from Perth and Sydney in February by Chinese state-owned property developers. And Forrest did the same.

Asked at a press conference in Melbourne last week about reports that his charitable organisation Minderoo had sent PPE to China, Forrest declared he was proud that in China's "darkest hour, without being asked … Minderoo proudly scoured what we could for thousands and hundreds of thousands of PPE." Yeah, to Australia's detriment.

The billionaire mining magnate owes his fortune to China, his biggest customer, so trying to dress up this act of self-interest as altruism is -nauseating.

Forrest's Chinese Communist Party partners tell him to jump and he asks how high.

Then he goes on Perth radio and pretends he doesn't know where the Wuhan virus came from: "I don't know if this virus started in China or somewhere else and frankly I don't care … because it just might be Australia, it just might be Britain, it just might be China." He can't be that stupid. This is Chinese Communist Party propaganda. Next, Forrest poses as a patriotic hero for bringing back medical supplies from China to make up for the ones he spirited out of the country.

Not that he paid for them himself. The Australian taxpayer is footing the entire bill.

Ten million COVID-19 test kits from China might have been a fair atonement (if they work), except that the federal government gave Forrest a platform to spout more repellent Chinese propaganda in return.

Days after the Chinese ambassador threatened a trade boycott in retaliation for Australia's call for an independent inquiry into the origins of the virus, Forrest spun Beijing's line alongside an obsequious federal health minister Greg Hunt. He even brought along a Chinese Communist Party official to speak at the press conference.

After the proverbial hit the fan, Hunt briefed out to journalists that he had been "ambushed" by Forrest and had no idea Chinese consul--general Long Zhou was to speak.

But anyone at that press conference saw Hunt singing the praises of the Beijing official. At one point you could hear him whisper to Forrest to remind him to "introduce" the honoured guest.

Then Zhou gave a speech claiming "the Chinese government has released information related to COVID-19 in an open transparent and responsible manner".

Hah! What a lie.

The Chinese government covered up the outbreak, punished whistleblower doctors, destroyed evidence at the Wuhan lab, and on January 14, knowing community transmission was occurring, coerced its puppets at the World Health Organisation to say the opposite.

On January 23, China imposed domestic travel bans in Hubei province but allowed international flights to spread the virus to the rest of the world.

"The virus is a demon and we cannot let that demon hide," said President Xi Jinping five days later, having ensured the virus would be exposed to the world.

So it is shameful that the representative of a government which has imposed such carnage on the world was accorded such a respectful hearing to spout the regime's lies.

Hunt actually thanked Zhou for "the very welcome and appreciated message … I thank you for the partnership we have struck between our two countries on this health cause today".

He went on to dodge questions from reporters about the virus origins. "That has not been determined". And, about Taiwan's efforts to join the WHO, against China's wishes. "Nice try" Hunt told the reporter.

Then Forrest urged Australia to postpone its call for the virus inquiry until after the US presidential election, which China hopes will be won by anyone but Donald Trump.

"If everyone wants an inquiry let's just push it back till after the US presidential election because if we don't this will become a whipping post", he told Sky News.

"I think that there's a bloke [Trump] camped up in the White House having a great time who'd really like to stay there. And I'd say, well, if you're so keen to stay there let's not make this a big issue, let's not make China a big issue, let's make how you manage COVID-19 a big issue and lets have a comprehensive inquiry when there's no political bias being pushed by America." Oh yeah? When might that be? When a more China-friendly president is in the White House?

Who does Forrest think he is, using a platform granted him by the Australian government to send Beijing's message to the White House?

If that's not bad enough, look at who he pals around with in China. His "very good" friend, who helped provide the test kits for Australia, and the man he described on Sky News as "a complete brother in arms", is Wang Jian, president of the Beijing Genomics Institute (BGI), whose corporate culture verges on eugenics.

Wang has forbidden BGI staff to have children with birth defects. "If they were born with defects, it would be a disgrace to all 7000 staff," Wang said in a panel discussion in 2018, translated by Shanghai United Media publication Sixth Tone.

None of the 1400 babies born to BGI employees have defects, he boasted. This is what to expect from a totalitarian regime.

Is this what Forrest wants us to keep turning a blind eye to? Australia has to extricate our economy from its China dependency. For starters, we need to bring back manufacturing of vital medical supplies, buy back the port of Darwin, and value add to our mineral resources to find new customers.

It will take national resolve to get there, but billionaires and compromised politicians will do whatever it takes to continue dealing with the devil.Miranda Devine is in New York for 18 months to cover current affairs for The Daily Telegraph
---
If you liked… CATCHING MILAT Try… 7NEWS PRESENTS: IVAN MILAT - BURIED SECRETS 7PM, SUNDAY, SEVEN A YEAR after Australia's worst serial killer Ivan Milat died an appropriately painful death in maximum security prison, more of his violent secrets emerge is this gripping new Spotlight investigation by Seven.

Continuing the search for new victims and exploring more burial grounds, producers actually uncover new detail and offer fascinating analysis from criminal psychologist Tim Watson-Munro and cold case specialist Xanthe Mallett. High-profile lawyer Chris Murphy, who once considered representing the evil murderer, also makes a shock appearance.

But perhaps the most compelling, and traumatic, parts of this special is when we hear from the families of those who believe their children or partners were his unnamed victims, dating back 50 years and numbering in their dozens. Terrifying and tragic and not to be missed. - Holly Byrnes

comedy FISK 9PM, WEDNESDAY, ABC TV KITTY Flanagan (pictured), Marty Sheargold and Julia Zemiro star in this clever comedy set in a probate legal office. Flanagan is Helen Tudor-Fisk, the daughter of a supreme court judge who, at 47, has run away from life after her husband ran off with an older woman and has had to start again. It's just the 'press pause' on your weekly stream of outrage you may need, with added chuckles. - HB

lifestyle MEN IN KILTS 9PM, WEDNESDAY, FOX ONE EWAN McGregor and his Long Way Round franchise will have to share the roads and screen with another celebrity Scot in Outlander's Sam Heughan and his buddy Graham McTavish (pictured, right with Heughan. The boys-own adventure continues this week with episodes three and four, exploring their heritage and meeting an incredible collection of people who capture what it means to be Scottish. Pour a whiskey and enjoy. - HB

doco FORMULA 1: DRIVE TO SURVIVE STREAMING, FROM FRIDAY, NETFLIX COVID-19 turned a lot of world sport on its head, but somehow, Formula 1 racing managed to get back on track - albeit for a shortened 2020 season. Go behind the scenes as teams keep their distance but don't lose any of their drive and determination to win. Stars Lewis Hamilton, Aussie favourite Daniel Ricciardo (pictured) and other top drivers. - HB

MUST WATCH If you like superhero movies you'll like Zack Snyder's Justice League. Streaming from 5pm, Thursday on BINGE.

WHEN Zack Snyder stepped away from the original production of Justice League in 2017 due to a family tragedy, another director stepped in to complete the movie. For years, fans wondered what Snyder's true vision would have been, and never gave up hope of the existence of an original cut for the movie. Years later, after fans campaigned hard to make it happen, the new film is finally here. In true Snyder fashion, expect a darker, serious and grittier approach, jam-packed with action and a deeper look into the major DC Extended Universe superheroes including Superman, Batman and Wonder Woman. With an all-star cast led by Ben Affleck, Henry Cavill and Gal Gadot, it's sure to be the epic must-see movie event of the year.

movie LET THEM ALL TALK NOW STREAMING, BINGE CELEBRATED actors Meryl Streep (pictured), Dianne Wiest and Candice Bergen play old friends in this comedy-drama directed by Steven Soderbergh. Streep plays a novelist of much acclaim struggling to fi nish her latest novel. Because she doesn't fly, she decides to invite her old friends for support and even reconciliation aboard the Queen Mary 2.

drama SUPERMAN & LOIS NEW EPISODES THURSDAYS, BINGE THE superhero shows of the DC Extended Universe get even better with this new series focused on the Man of Steel and his family. Settled in Smallville, Clark Kent/Superman (Tyler Hoechlin, pictured) and Lois (Elizabeth Tulloch) are raising their two sons. They must deal with teenagers discovering their own Kryptonian powers and, of course, endless threats to the world.

doco PERSONA: THE DARK TRUTH BEHIND PERSONALITY TESTS NOW STREAMING, BINGE PERSONA explores the origins of America's great obsession with personality testing and the intriguing history behind the world-famous Myers-Briggs Type Indicator. What this documentary also raises is a whole slew of ethical questions, around how they can often do more harm than good.
---
THERE is nothing more important in rugby league than helping your mate. Help them with a support run. Fill their space in defence. Doesn't matter what it is. Just be there. Same goes for this COVID-19 pandemic.

With rugby league's biggest players now preparing to go into lockdown, The Daily Telegraph has asked me to reveal the advice I'll be giving to Penrith and NSW Origin players as they prepare to spend weeks, even months in isolation. And my key point is the same one Blues coach Brad Fittler continually pushes in Origin camp: help someone else.

It is the same with Panthers coach Ivan Cleary. At a time when we are being increasingly isolated from society, a key ingredient to players staying healthy - both physically and mentally - will be finding a way to help others. Same deal the rest of us.

In fact, these 10 tips below are my advice on how we can all stay healthy as Australia goes into lockdown: 1. Find a way to help someone else. All the best athletes I've ever worked with think like this. Just as all the best people you've ever know will think like this. So be that person too.

2. Set up a good routine. My advice is to start each day with yoga, stretching, or even breathing exercises. Just agree to get mobile before looking at your iPhone. Also, while completing your morning routine acknowledge one thing you're grateful for - it helps.

3. Hydrate, and from the moment you wake up.

4. Surround yourself with a support team. Crucial, even in isolation. Find ways to remain connected with those who bring out your best.

5.Eat well. This takes effort and commitment, but your body will thank you. 6. Work on your mind. What better time than now to try meditation? Even if new for you, it doesn't matter. You owe it to yourself to try something, even breathing exercises.

7. Stay strong. Continue your gym workouts, even if it requires improvisation. Or just as importantly, START a gym routine. Break up your day with a couple of push-ups and sit ups, then tomorrow try to do more.

8. Stay connected. Too often, technology interferes with real connection. Use this time at home with family to talk. Technology now will also help you stay connected as it is with Panthers players so get the right balance.

9. Fill your mind with positive fuel. How? Consume positive content.10. Sleep well. This is your wonder drug. If I were rating these tips, this would be No.1. Even though you are no longer making the commute into town, still ensure you get a solid night of sleep. Everything starts from here.
---
Government dossier claims incurable virus invented at lab with links to Australia EXPLOSIVE DOSSIER THE Australian government trained and employed a team of Chinese scientists - now the subject of a probe into the origins of COVID-19 - who went on to genetically modify deadly coronaviruses that could be transmitted from bats to humans and had no cure.

As intelligence agencies investigate whether the virus inadvertently leaked from a Wuhan laboratory, the team and its research led by scientist Shi Zhengli feature in a dossier prepared by Western governments that points to several studies they conducted as areas of concern.

It cites their work discovering samples of coronavirus from a cave in the Yunnan province with striking genetic similarity to COVID-19, along with their research synthesising a bat-derived coronavirus that could not be treated.

The 15-page research paper, obtained by The Saturday Telegraph, lays the foundation for the cover-up case being mounted by Western governments against China, stating that it deliberately engaged in the "suppression and destruction of evidence", in an "assault on international transparency" and to the "endangerment of other countries".

Its major themes include the "deadly denial of human-to-human transmission", the silencing or "disappearing" of doctors and scientists who spoke out, the destruction of evidence from Wuhan laboratories, and "bleaching of wildlife market stalls" along with the refusal to provide live virus samples to international scientists working on a vaccine.

Key figures of the Wuhan Institute of Virology team, who feature in the government dossier, were either trained or employed in the CSIRO's Australian Animal Health Laboratory where they conducted foundational research on deadly pathogens in live bats including SARS, as part of an ongoing partnership between the CSIRO and the Chinese Academy of Sciences.

This partnership continues to this day, according to the website of the Wuhan -Institute of Virology, despite concerns the research is too risky.

Politicians in the Morrison government are speaking out about the national security and biosecurity concerns of this relationship as the controversial research into bat-related viruses now comes into sharp focus amid the investigation by the Five Eyes intelligence agencies of the United States, Australia, NZ, Canada and the UK.

RISKY BAT RESEARCH In Wuhan, in China's Hubei province, not far from the now infamous Wuhan wet market, Ms Shi and her team work in high-protective gear in level-three and level-four bio-containment laboratories studying deadly batlike coronaviruses.

At least one of the -estimated 50 virus samples Shi has in her laboratory is a 96 per cent genetic match to COVID-19. When Ms Shi heard the news about the outbreak of a new pneumonia-like virus, she spoke about the sleepless nights she suffered worrying whether it was her lab that was responsible for the outbreak.

As she told Scientific American magazine in an article published this week: "Could they have come from our lab?" Since her initial fears, Shi has satisfied herself the genetic sequence of COVID-19 did not match any her lab was studying. Yet, given the extent of the People's Republic of China's lies, obfuscations and angry refusal to allow any investigation into the origin of the outbreak, her laboratory is now being closely looked at by international intelligence agencies.

The Australian government's position is the virus most likely originated in the Wuhan wet market but that there is a remote possibility - a 5 per cent chance - it accidentally leaked from a laboratory.

The US's position, according to reports this week, is that it is more likely the virus leaked from a laboratory but it could also have come from a wet market that trades and slaughters wild animals, where other diseases including the H5N1 avian flu and SARS originated from.

CREATING MORE DEADLY VIRUSES The Western governments' research paper, obtained by The Telegraph, confirms this. It notes a 2013 study conducted by a team of researchers including Ms Shi who collected a sample of horseshoe bat faeces from a cave in Yunnan province, China, which was later found to contain a virus 96.2 per cent identical to SARS-CoV-2, the virus that caused COVID-19.

The research dossier also references work done by the team to synthesise SARS-like coronaviruses, to analyse whether they could be transmissible from bats to mammals. This means they were altering parts of the virus to test whether it was transmissible to different species.

Their November 2015 study, done in conjunction with the University of North Carolina, concluded that the SARS-like virus could jump directly from bats to humans and there was no treatment that could help.

The study acknowledges the incredible danger of the work they were conducting. "The potential to prepare for and mitigate future outbreaks must be weighed against the risk of creating more dangerous pathogens," they wrote.

You have to be a scientist to understand it, but below is the line that the governments' research paper references from the study.

"To examine the emergence potential (that is, the potential to infect humans) of circulating bat CoVs, we built a chimeric virus encoding a novel, zoonotic CoV spike protein - from the RsSHCO14-CoV sequence that was isolated from Chinese horseshoe bats - in the context of the SARS-CoV mouse-adapted backbone," the study states.

One of Shi's co-authors on this paper, Ralph Baric from North Carolina University said in an interview with Science Daily at the time: "This virus is highly pathogenic and treatments developed against the original SARS virus in 2002 and the ZMapp drugs used to fight ebola fail to neutralise and control this particular virus." A few years later, in March 2019, Ms Shi and her team, including Peng Zhou, who worked in Australia for five years, published a review -titled Bat Coronaviruses in China in the medical journal Viruses where they wrote that they "aim to predict virus hotspots and their cross-species transmission potential" describing it as a matter of "urgency to study bat corona-viruses in China to understand their potential of causing another outbreak. Their review stated: "It is highly likely that future SARS or MERS like coronavirus outbreaks will originate from bats, and there is an increased probability that this will occur in China." It examined which proteins were "important for interspecies transmission". Despite intelligence probes into whether her laboratory may have been responsible for the outbreak, Ms Shi is not hitting pause on her research which she argues is more important than ever in preventing a pandemic. She plans to head a national project to systemically sample viruses in bat caves, with estimates that there are more than 5000 coronavirus strains "waiting to be discovered in bats globally".

"Bat-borne coronaviruses will cause more outbreaks," she told Scientific American. "We must find them before they find us."

AUSTRALIA'S INVOLVEMENT Ms Shi, the director of the Centre for Emerging Infectious Diseases at the Chinese Academy of Sciences' Wuhan Institute of Virology, spent time in Australia as a -visiting scientist for three months from February 22 to May 21, 2006 where she worked at the CSIRO's top-level Australian Animal Health Laboratory, which has recently been -renamed.

The CSIRO would not comment on what work she undertook during her time here, but according to an archived and translated biography on the Wuhan Institute of Virology website it stated that she was working with the SARS virus.

"The SARS virus antibodies and genes were tested in the State Key Laboratory of Virology in Wuhan and the Animal Health Research Laboratory in Geelong, Australia," it states.

The Telegraph has obtained two photographs of her working at the CSIRO laboratories, including in the level-four lab, in 2006.

Ms Shi's protégé, Peng Zhou - now the head of the Bat Virus Infection and Immunity Project at the Wuhan Institute of Virology - spent three years at the bio-containment facility Australian Animal Health Laboratory between 2011 and 2014. He was sent by China to complete his doctorate at the CSIRO from 2009-2010.

During this time, Mr Zhou arranged for wild-caught bats to be transported alive by air from Queensland to the lab in Victoria where they were euthanised for dissection and studied for deadly viruses.

Dr Linfa Wang, while an Honorary Professor of the Wuhan Institute of Virology between 2005 and 2011, also worked in the CSIRO Office of the Chief Executive Science Leader in Virology between 2008 and 2011.

Federal Liberal senator Sarah Henderson said it was "very concerning" that Chinese scientists had been conducting research into bat viruses at the CSIRO in Geelong, Victoria, in jointly funded projects between the Australian and Chinese governments.

"We need to exercise extreme care with any research projects involving foreign nationals which may compromise our national security or biosecurity," she said.

While the US has cut all funding to the Wuhan Institute of Virology, the CSIRO would not respond to -questions about whether it is still collaborating with it, saying only that it collaborates with research organisations from around the world to prevent diseases.

"As with all partners, CSIRO undertakes due diligence and takes security very seriously," a spokesman said. "CSIRO undertakes all research in accordance with strict biosecurity and legislative requirements."

IS THE RESEARCH WORTH THE RISK?

The US withdrew funding from controversial experiments that make pathogens more potent or likely to spread dangerous viruses in October 2014, concerned it could lead to a global pandemic. The pause on funding for 21 "gain of function" studies was then lifted in December 2017.

Despite the concerns, the CSIRO continued to partner and fund research with the Wuhan Institute of Virology.

The CSIRO refused to respond to questions from The Saturday Telegraph about how much money went into joint research collaboration with the Chinese Academy of Science and its Wuhan Institute of Virology. The Wuhan Institute still lists the CSIRO as a partner while the US has cut ties since the coronavirus outbreak.

The argument is whether it is worth developing these viruses to anticipate and prevent a pandemic when a leak of the virus could also cause one. Debate in the scientific community is heated.

There have also been serious concerns about a lack of adequate safety practices at the Wuhan Institute of Virology when dealing with deadly viruses.

A "Sensitive but Unclassified" cable, dated January 19, 2018, obtained by The Washington Post, revealed that US embassy scientists and diplomats in Beijing visited the laboratory and sent warnings back to Washington about inadequate safety practices and management weaknesses as it conducted research on coronaviruses from bats.

"During interactions with scientists at the WIV laboratory, they noted the new lab has a serious shortage of -appropriately trained technicians and investigators needed to safely operate this high-containment laboratory," the cable stated.

UNLIKELY CLAIMS VIRUS CREATED IN LAB Scientific consensus is that the virus came from a wet market. But the US's top spy agency confirmed on the record for the first time yesterday that the US intelligence committee is investigating whether COVID-19 was the result of an accident at a Wuhan laboratory.

The Office of the Director of National Intelligence acting director Richard Grenell said the virus was not created in a laboratory.

"The entire Intelligence Community has been consistently providing critical support to US policymakers and those responding to the COVID-19 virus, which originated in China," he said.

"The Intelligence Community also concurs with the wide scientific consensus that the COVID-19 virus was not man-made or genetically modified. As we do in all crises, the Community's experts respond by surging resources and producing critical intelligence on issues vital to US national security. The IC will continue to rigorously examine emerging information and intelligence to determine whether the outbreak began through contact with infected animals or if it was the result of an accident at a laboratory in Wuhan." Despite Mr Grenell's statement and scientific consensus that the virus was not created in a laboratory, based on its genome sequence, the governments' research paper obtained by The Telegraph notes a study that claims it was created.

South China University of Technology researchers published a study on February 6 that concluded "the killer coronavirus probably originated from a laboratory in Wuhan. Safety level may need to be reinforced in high-risk biohazards laboratories".

"The paper is soon withdrawn because it 'was not supported by direct proofs', according to author Botao Xiano," the dossier noted, continuing to point out that: '"No scientists have confirmed or refuted the paper's findings', scholar Yanzhong Huang wrote on March 5." The Saturday Telegraph does not claim that the South China University of Technology study is credible, only that it has been included in this government research paper produced as part of the case against China.

CHINA'S COVER-UP OF EARLY SAMPLES The paper obtained by The Saturday Telegraph speaks about "the suppression and destruction of evidence" and points to "virus samples ordered destroyed at genomics labs, wildlife market stalls bleached, the genome sequence not shared publicly, the Shanghai lab closure for 'rectification', academic articles subjected to prior review by the Ministry of Science and Technology and data on asymptomatic 'silent carriers' kept secret".

It paints a picture of how the Chinese government deliberately covered up the coronavirus by silencing doctors who spoke out, destroying evidence from the Wuhan laboratory and refusing to provide live virus samples to international scientists working on a vaccine.

The US, along with other countries, has repeatedly -demanded a live virus sample from the first batch of cases. This is understood to have not been forthcoming despite its vital importance in developing a vaccine while potentially providing an indication of where the virus originated.

THE LAB WORKER WHO DISAPPEARED Out of all the doctors, activists, journalists and scientists who have reportedly disappeared after speaking out about the coronavirus or criticising the response of Chinese authorities, no case is more intriguing and worrying than that of Huang Yan Ling.

A researcher at the Wuhan Institute of Virology, the South China Morning Post reported rumours swirling on Chinese social media that she was the first to be diagnosed with the disease and was -"patient zero".

Then came her reported disappearance, with her biography and image deleted from the Wuhan Institute of Virology's website. On February 16 the Wuhan Institute of Virology denied she was -patient zero and said she was alive and well, but there has been no proof of life since then, fanning speculation.

DESTRUCTION OF EVIDENCE On December 31, Chinese authorities started censoring news of the virus from search engines, deleting terms including "SARS variation", "Wuhan seafood market" and "Wuhan unknown pneumonia".

On January 1 without any investigation into where the virus originated from, the Wuhan seafood market was closed and disinfected.

It has been reported in the New York Times that individual animals and cages were not swabbed "eliminating evidence of what animal might have been the source of the coronavirus and which people had become infected but survived". The Hubei health commission ordered genomics companies to stop testing for the new virus and to destroy all samples. A day later, on January 3, China's leading health authority, the National Health Commission, ordered Wuhan pneumonia samples be moved to designated testing facilities or destroyed, while instructing a no-publication order related to the unknown disease.

Doctors who bravely spoke out about the new virus were detained and condemned. Their detentions were splashed across the Chinese state media with a call from Wuhan police for "all citizens to not fabricate rumours, not spread rumours, not believe rumours".

A tweet from the Global Times on January 2 states: "Police in Central China's Wuhan arrested 8 people spreading rumours about local outbreak of unidentifiable #pneumonia. Previous online posts said it was SARS." This had the intended effect of silencing other doctors who may have been inclined to speak out.

So the truth about the outbreak in China has remained shrouded in secrecy, with President Xi Jinping aggressively rejecting global calls for an inquiry.

KEY DATES IN COVID COVER-UP November 9, 2015 Wuhan Institute of Virology publish a study revealing they created a new virus in the lab from SARS-CoV.

December 6, 2019 Five days after a man linked to Wuhan's seafood market presented pneumonia-like symptoms, his wife contracts it, suggesting human to human transmission.

December 27 China's health authorities told a novel disease, then affecting some 180 patients, was caused by a new coronavirus.

December 26-30 Evidence of new virus emerges from Wuhan patient data.

December 31 Chinese internet authorities begin censoring terms from social media such as Wuhan Unknown Pneumonia.

January 1, 2020 Eight Wuhan doctors who warned about new virus are detained and condemned. January 3 China's top health authority issues a gag order.

January 5 Wuhan Municipal Health Commission stops releasing daily updates on new cases. Continues until January 18.

January 10 PRC official Wang Guangfa says outbreak "under control" and mostly a "mild condition".

January 12 Professor Zhang Yongzhen's lab in Shanghai is closed by authorities for "rectification", one day after it shares genomic sequence data with the world for the first time.

January 14 PRC National Health Commission chief Ma Xiaowei privately warns colleagues the virus is likely to develop into a major public health event.

January 24 Officials in Beijing prevent the Wuhan Institute of Virology from sharing sample isolates with the University of Texas.

February 6 China's internet watchdog tightens controls on social media platforms. February 9 Citizen-journalist and local businessman Fang Bin disappears. april 17Wuhan belatedly raises its official fatalities by 1290.
---
Stadium boss reveals plan to make Sydney the nation's home of sport SYDNEY'S new stadiums boss Tony Shepherd is planning to turn the Harbour City into the new sporting capital of Australia by bringing in a host of global superstars to fill our venues.

Premier Gladys Berejik-lian has instructed Mr Shepherd to deliver world-class events and entertainment to the Sydney Football Stadium, Bankwest and ANZ Stadium to justify the government's billion-dollar spend on the venues.

The plan is for Sydney to become the country's home of live enter-tainment and big-time sport, overthrowing Melbourne for boasting rights. Among the big events, Mr Shepherd wants to open negotiations with the NFL to bring two franchises to Sydney for a competition game of American football as part of a spectacular launch on the world stage for the new $750 million Sydney Football Stadium.

He wants Sydney to have a major event every month to drive the NSW economy and tourism, which has been hit so hard by the COVID-19 -financial crisis.

"The Government is -instructing the new board to deliver big-time sport and events," Mr Shepherd said in his first interview since the appointment.

"It has been made very clear from the Premier down." A possible calendar would include EPL giants Manchester Uni-ted or Liverpool, Ed Sheeran or Taylor Swift concerts, Origin, footy finals and even a world heavyweight boxing contest at Bankwest Stadium in December.

Sydney will host the final of FIFA Women's World Cup and is bidding for the 2027 Rugby World Cup.

Victoria has long domin-ated sport in this country with the Australian Open tennis, the Boxing Day Test, the AFL grand final, the Melbourne Cup and the Australia Grand Prix. The NSW Government announced this week it was setting up the super stadium board, headed by Mr Shepherd as chairman, to put an end to years of -bitterness between the ANZ Stadium administration and the SCG Trust.

It ends almost 150 years of history and tradition of the Trust managing events in Moore Park.

Instead of competing against each other, ANZ and the Trust will join forces in a powerful partnership to -ensure Sydney is in a position to compete with the likes of Melbourne, Adelaide, Perth and Brisbane for the hosting rights for the biggest global and local events.

"We will be aiming for one big global event every year," Mr Shepherd said, "and we want to stage a major event every month at one of our stadiums. We have to be -entrepreneurial.

"Even new content like a NSW versus Queensland rugby union State of Origin ... why not. It works so well in rugby league.

"We've got the most beautiful city in the world and the safest city in the world.

"I want Sydney to be the sporting capital of the country in all codes and we will with the new stadium network. We've got the population to do it and the fans that love it." The monthly events would be staged around Sydney's biggest thoroughbred racing carnivals - The Championships, the Everest and the Golden Eagle.

Shepherd's views on the future of sport in Sydney surprisingly contradict those of independent commission chairman Peter V'landys and his vision to build boutique 20,000-seat suburban venues.

Mr V'landys and the rugby league TV networks prefer smaller venues to provide a tribalism atmosphere without the rows of empty seats as the backdrop to broadcasts.

He has been lobbying the state government in recent months to build new grounds at Brookvale, Liverpool, Penrith and southern Sydney.

Mr Shepherd says fans will attend the bigger venues, given the right facilities. "We have to work with the clubs and the codes to make it special," he said. "Have a look at Bankwest. Attendances are up because it's a great stadium. "People love going there. There's plenty for kids to do. It's for the whole family.

"Mum and dad are working. They've got a couple of kids. They need a day out. If you give them good facilities the whole family can share they will come.

"It's all about giving the customers what they want."

JANUARY SCG TEST MATCH

FEBRUARY CRICKET T20 WORLD CUP

MARCH MAJOR SHOW ED SHEERAN TAYLOR SWIFT

APRIL THE CHAMPIONSHIP

MAY LIVERPOOL MANCHESTER UNITEDPREMIER LEAGUE

JUNE STATE OF ORIGIN

JULY WOMEN'S FOOTBALL WORLD CUP (2023)

AUGUST BLEDISLOE CUP

SEPTEMBER NRL AND AFL FINALS

OCTOBER NRL GRAND FINAL AND THE EVEREST

NOVEMBER RUGBY WORLD CUP FINAL (2027) AND GOLDEN EAGLE

DECEMBER WILDER V FURY III
---
NSW Origin legend Benny Elias has labelled the Queensland government "nuts" for turning its back on State of Origin, saying: "We'll take all three games with open arms." The 2020 Origin series appears up for tender, with Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk sensationally CONTINUED PAGE 64 FROM BACK PAGE ruling Brisbane out as host during the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. Palaszczuk has also suggested the interstate series be scrapped entirely this year, or played sometime over summer, saying she is "really concerned" about the health risk to Queensland players.

So with the Banana Benders now out, Blues greats Elias and Steve Roach have urged Sydney to take control of all three games, suggesting Bankwest Stadium would be the "perfect" venue if fans are locked out.

"For the Queenslanders to say they don't want Origin, they're kidding themselves," Elias said.

"Honestly, they're nuts. I understand that, right now, health is everything. It goes without saying. But even with the NRL relaunch date of May 28, it's still a long way off.

"Especially right now, when every day is an eternity. But if Queensland doesn't want Origin, who cares? They've been screaming and carrying on recently about how much they want the NRL grand final, offering up massive amounts of money to try and take it away from Sydney. Yet now they're giving up the event of the year?

"Saying they don't want to be involved with a series that brings in record TV ratings and boasts global appeal? Queensland continues to humour me." Roach agreed, adding: "Doesn't this premier want to win another election up there? An Origin game in Brisbane, it's like Christmas Day to them. So to just give that away … what else can we say but 'thank you, thank you, thank you'." Speaking to Channel 9 yesterday, Palaszczuk not only cast doubt on Origin being played in Brisbane during the health pandemic but questioned how the event could be held anywhere.

"I love the footy as much as everyone else," said the premier, who is also against sending Queensland's three NRL clubs to Sydney to restart the competition. "I think it's devastating we're not going to see State of Origin this year. We always have a State of Origin, but how can you have it? Maybe in December? Let's keep our fingers crossed." Apart from turning her back on Origin, Palaszczuk said she was also against Queensland's three NRL clubs moving to Sydney in order to restart the season by May 28.

"I'm really concerned about my Queensland players going down to Sydney," she said."All you need is one community transmission down in Sydney and the whole team could possibly have it."
---
AN Australian virus expert who has flown to China to investigate the origins of the coronavirus pandemic has said his team will be looking at events prior to one of the first known outbreaks at a Wuhan animal market.

Dominic Dwyer is a director at NSW Health Pathology and one of 15 global team members who have been sent by the World Health Organisation to try to find out how the virus began its devastating spread. He arrived in China last week and his team's fieldwork will begin once a fortnight's quarantine is over.

"The focus here is really on the very early cases of COVID-19 that occurred in Wuhan to try to identify where they might have picked up the infection," Mr Dwyer told Channel 9's Today yesterday.

The scientists will be looking at how the outbreak at a so-called wet market in the city of Wuhan was sparked.

It was identified as a likely breeding ground for the virus after a cluster was identified there in December 2019.

The connection between the market and the early -coronavirus cluster led scientists to suspect the virus could have spread from an animal to humans, although experts still are not sure of its origins.

"(We are) really concentrating on the first few cases. Even before the outbreak in the wet market in Wuhan," Mr Dwyer said.

"There were cases around beforehand, where did they come from? What sort of history did they have in terms of animal exposure, or other sorts of exposures that we haven't figured out?" Understanding the origins of the coronavirus pandemic could help prevent the next pandemic, the WHO believes.

Mr Dwyer said China had been a welcoming host so far.

"We have been told that we will get access to what we want to, in terms of where we want to go and (what we want to) see," he said. "Places like the market or the research institutes or the hospitals. That's all been promised to us."
---
CORONAVIRUS has exposed the absurdity of our antiquated political system in Australia, and it's time we had a referendum on the future of state and territory government.

In the early days of COVID-19, Australians marvelled at the integrated and cohesive approach that a national cabinet delivered.

But that's all gone pear-shaped with the Victorian scandal. And it is a scandal, not just because the Victorian government dropped the ball on its hotel quarantine protocols and security but because of the blame game that has since emerged. Victorian Premier Daniel Andrews has reverted to type by blaming the federal government for the aged care scandal that is a crisis within a crisis in Victoria.

Never mind that it was his government that dropped the ball on hotel security and woefully handled proper contact tracing protocols.

And so we look to Queensland where the xenophobic tactics of Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk play out every day as she takes the war cry "Queenslander" to new levels.

She too is going it alone now on everything. Forget the commonwealth. This cheesy Queensland jingoism might work at State of Origin time, but it's just wrong during a life-threatening pandemic.

We get that Ms Palaszczuk is a proud Queenslander. If that's the case, where's her plan to turn the disastrous economy around? Or fix juvenile crime? Or save the lives of babies who are dying under this government's watch?

Nobody slammed the borders shut on those volunteers from NSW who came to Queensland to help repair and rebuild after Cyclone Yasi, or Cyclone Debbie, or the terrible floods or bushfires of the past decade. It is now clear that the lack of co-operation and political pointscoring being conducted between the states and territories and the commonwealth has undermined our COVID-19 response.

The feds said keep the schools open, the states closed them. The feds said keep the borders open, the states closed them. All we need in Australia is a federal government and local government. Imagine the savings on the bureaucracy and politicians alone.

The system we have now, inherited 119 years ago when the Constitution was enacted, is broken.

With a population of 25 million, we have about 1000 state and territory politicians. The duplication in resources, money and energy is extraordinary.

As the PM keeps saying, our post-COVID recovery means we need to throw the conventional rule book out. It would mean local government stepping up. Make no mistake, getting rid of the state and territory governments would be the catalyst to a brighter and better Australia. The time is now for a referendum to abolish them.
---
REFORM AGENDA THE threat of a trade war with China has not stopped Australia capitalising on its success in gaining support for a coronavirus inquiry by now lobbying world leaders to give health -officials inspection powers.

After helping to secure 116 countries to co-sponsor a draft resolution calling for an independent review and examination of the origins of COVID-19, the Morrison Government has renewed its push to beef-up the powers of the World Health Organisation.

Health Minister Greg Hunt (pictured) was expected to speak to the World Health Assembly overnight in favour of the draft resolution proposed by the European Union and highlight the need to bolster the power of officials to investigate new diseases.

"We need to learn the lessons from this pandemic and ensure we have the strongest possible global health architecture, with an enhanced ability to prevent and respond to future outbreaks," he was expected to say.

"This could include an examination of whether the WHO's mandate and powers, including around inspection, need to be strengthened to ensure WHO members have timely access to critical data." China denied WHO officials entry into Wuhan for almost a month after the first case of COVID-19 in December, and has remained reluctant to release detailed case data.

Mr Hunt's speech also highlighted the danger of wildlife wet markets. Foreign Minister Marise Payne yesterday confirmed the origins of the coronavirus pandemic - including which animals it passed through before infecting humans - will be examined if world leaders back the "comprehensive" draft resolution.

A motion in the draft resolution requests WHO director general Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus work closely with animal health and agriculture organisations to "identify the zoonotic source of the virus".

It also calls for an examination of "the route of introduction to the human population".

Deputy chief medical officer Professor Paul Kelly said he hoped a coronavirus review would put an end to the international blame game.

"I think the most important thing - rather than apportioning blame to one particular country or another country - is that we get to the bottom of what's happened," he said. While it is possible the pressure of the broad coalition built by Australia will force China's hand to support the review, there remains a chance it will further anger Beijing, which could result in further retaliation on trade.
---
ONE of Manly's brightest prospects is on the verge of making his long-awaited NRL debut - for a rival club.

Sea Eagles young gun Albert Hopoate will move to the New Zealand Warriors on a four-week loan.

Tipped to make his NRL debut as an 18-year-old in 2019, Hopoate was robbed of the chance when he ruptured his ACL, for the second time, playing SG Ball.

After recovering from a knee reconstruction, Hopoate's chances of pushing for a Sea Eagles debut were cruelled by the disruption to the 2020 season because of COVID-19.

"We're delighted to have Albert on board. He was a prodigious talent coming through the junior grades, representative sides and Origin age teams for New South Wales," Warriors recruitment manager Peter O'Sullivan said. "Unfortunately, injury has curtailed his NRL aspirations so far but we are looking forward to seeing him play for the Vodafone Warriors. "Albert is a player who can handle fullback, wing and centre, and is uncanny in his likeness to older brother Will."
---
Promoters strike pay dirt" "with fans hungry for" "'superfight' showdown"

THE Sydney Superfight is set to break the all-time Australian pay-per-view record of Anthony Mundine and Danny Green in 2006.

The double billing of Tim Tszyu's world title elimination fight against Bowyn Morgan, and heavyweight showdown between league legend Paul Gallen against UFC giant Mark Hunt, is on track to becoming the biggest-selling boxing event in Australian history by surpassing 200,000 purchases.

The list of top PPV boxing events in Australia can finally be revealed, and it is -remarkable that the son of Kostya Tszyu and a former NSW State of Origin captain can combine to outsell not only Mundine and Green, but pugilist superstars Floyd Mayweather and Manny Pacquiao in this country.

It's understood that pre-sales for the Sydney Superfight have already surpassed Tszyu's previous bout against Jeff Horn, an event that stunned Main Event officials by outselling Horn-Mundine and Horn-Pacquiao.

No doubt COVID-19 played a role, with a number of sports and major global events cancelled amid lockdowns, increasing the appetite for live content, however, Tszyu's stunning performance also catapulted him into next phase of pay-per-view stardom.

No Limit Promotions, which promotes Tszyu and Gallen, then decided to put both men on the same card at Bankwest Stadium rather than on separate events, and it has been a masterstroke.

No Limit chief executive, the former NRL star George Rose, was in the Sydney Football Stadium on May 17, 2006, when Mundine defeated Green, and this will be the first stadium boxing event in the city since that famous night when the PPV record was set and remains unsurpassed.

"We'd love to break that record, it would be huge for us," Rose told The Daily Telegraph.

"If we don't do it now, we'll be looking for it in the next one. "We'll keep trying to chase those titles from our side of the fence, that's what we want to do.

"And for Tim, once he fights for a world title and -becomes a world champion, he's going to have that platform for everyone else to be a part of as well.

"It is epic, we went to Mundine-Green and we were kids then, watching the fight, we had tickets in the stands but we managed to jump the fence to get down on the grass.

"As boxing fans as kids, that was one of the coolest nights we were ever at in Sydney.

"The fact we're hosting the next stadium show in Sydney, it's surreal. "We've lined up the card to the point where every fight is going to be entertaining - we've got characters here in Australian boxing, quality fighters." Adding to the magnitude of the event is the WBO's announcement that super-welterweight champion Patrick Teixeira, of Brazil, must lock in his title defence by January 6.

Teixeira can't get out of Brazil due to COVID, and is unlikely to be able to secure travel to fight against No.1 contender Brian Castano within three weeks.

If he cannot fight, the WBO will strip him of the title and announce that Castano and Tszyu will fight for the vacant title, with Teixeira as No.1 contender to fight the winner once he can travel again.

Negotiations are already under way to host the potential Tszyu-Castano world title fight in Australia next year.

"I'm excited that we might be able to fight for a world title here, and Tim deserves it, he is at that level," Rose said. "If he can put on a good performance against Bowyn Morgan he deserves the shot, and the WBO agrees."
---
When we speak of security in terms of biological research, most -people assume this to mean security surrounding laboratories and the like.

In a time of great concern over the source of the COVID-19 virus that has now infected more than 3.7 million people and killed close to 260,000, that is certainly a very legitimate assumption.

This is especially so given that China has undertaken substantial research into bat--related viruses - and that an amount of that research -occurred in partnership with Australia's CSIRO.

But an equally great security concern is political.

A laboratory may be perfectly sealed and sterile, but the information gathered within those protected facilities must also be safely locked down.

That issue now prompts Morrison government Senators, Matt Canavan, Sarah Henderson and Jim Molan to propose a federal oversight agency to -ensure there is no foreign interference in Australia's science and research sector.

"There are credible claims that China has sought to abuse our open and free academic -environment to further their strategic goals," Senator Canavan points out "There is a national interest in protecting the security of our high-level research." Senator Henderson is of like mind. "A federal agency to regulate research by foreign nat-ionals would be an important way of combating foreign interference," she said.

The requirement for such an authority becomes even more obvious following exclusive revelations in The Daily Telegraph of professional ties between a scientist employed by China's People's Liberation Army and the director of Australia's Animal Health Laboratory - -recently renamed the Centre for Disease Preparedness.

The Daily Telegraph does not suggest any wrongdoing by any party in this specific instance. We simply point out the professional connections.

Dr Tu Changchun of the PLA's Academy of Military Medical Sciences has a fascinating background in coronavirus research and also happens to sit on the board of the Wuhan -Institute of Virology's scientific advisory committee.The Institute, of course, is now at the centre of the global probe into COVID-19's origins.
---
CRONULLA had the last laugh over Valentine Holmes after the Sharks produced a 26-16 boilover to sink the Cowboys in Townsville last night.

The Sharks took a bite out of North Queensland's NRL title -credentials and recorded their first win of the season in an end-to-end contest at Queensland Country Bank Stadium.

Holmes had little impact in his first match against the club he walked out on in 2018 to pursue a career in the NFL. After blitzing the Titans last week, Holmes registered only 91m, no line breaks, made three errors and failed to create a try as the Sharks got revenge on the Queensland Origin star following his -controversial exit from The Shire.

The Cowboys thrashed the Titans a week ago but lacked punch without their chief destroyer Jason Taumalolo (knee) while Coen Hess (ankle) was a late withdrawal and John Asiata suffered a knee injury in the first half.

Despite making 17 errors and completing at only 60 per cent, the Cowboys had 53 per cent possession but still struggled to crack Cronulla's defence.

In the absence of Taumalolo, middle forwards Josh McGuire (169m) and Frank Molo (145m) were shining lights for the error-riddled Cowboys. It was Cronulla's right edge that did the damage for the Sharks with young guns Jesse Ramien and Ronaldo Mulitalo terrorising the Cowboys all night.

In only his 12th NRL game, -Mulitalo proved he is a genuine Queensland Origin bolter with a two-try haul while Ramien also bagged a double to upstage the Cowboys. The Sharks got on the board first through Ramien but it was some poor Cronulla defence which allowed Cowboys winger Kyle Feldt to level scores after 26 minutes.

The visitors went into the break with a 12-6 lead after Mulitalo pounced on a deft kick from Shaun Johnson. Mulitalo was caught napping early in the second half, allowing a determined Justin O'Neill to score, but atoned with a sensational finish to give the Sharks a 16-10 buffer.

When Ramien punished the Cowboys with a 95m effort in the 53rd minute, the Sharks looked home. But Cronulla let the Cowboys back into the contest almost immediately with an error allowing Feldt to bag his second.

Mulitalo was in the thick of the action again, soaring over rival winger Ben Hampton to put Briton Nikora over for the match-winner.

The Cowboys will get a chance to bounce back when they face the battling Warriors on the Central Coast next Friday.

Meantime, Cronulla had to overcome a major drama before the game with six players failing initial temperature tests.

The group, including five-eighth Matt Moylan, all recorded temperatures in excess of the 37.2C limit set as part of NRL biosecurity protocols.

Fortunately for the winless Sharks, team officials have confirmed the players all passed a -subsequent test and have been cleared to play against the Cowboys at Queensland Country Bank -Stadium.

It's not the first time the temperature regulations have disrupted a team's pre- game preparation since the league resumed following the COVID-19 shutdown. Brisbane halfback Brodie Croft had to pass a secondary test before last week's clash with Parramatta while Sydney Roosters had a similar drama before their clash with the Broncos at Suncorp -Stadium on Thursday.

Brett Morris, Kyle Flanagan and Joey Manu all failed their first tests upon arriving at the stadium before passing a secondary test to get the all-clear to play.

Superstar fullback James Tedesco didn't even make the trip to Brisbane after waking with a high temperature, with Roosters officials deciding to leave him in Sydney.

SHARKS 26 COWBOYS 16 CRONULLA Tries: R Mulitalo 2 J Ramien 2 B Nikora Goals: S Johnson 3 NORTH QUEENSLAND Tries: K Feldt 2 J O'Neill Goals: V Holmes 2
---
Promoters strike pay dirt" "with fans hungry for" 'superfight' showdown" THE Sydney Superfight is set to break the all-time Australian pay-per-view record of Anthony Mundine and Danny Green in 2006.

The double billing of Tim Tszyu's world title elimination fight against Bowyn Morgan, and heavyweight showdown between league legend Paul Gallen against UFC giant Mark Hunt, is on track to becoming the biggest-selling boxing event in Australian history by surpassing 200,000 purchases.

The list of top PPV boxing events in Australia can finally be revealed, and it is -remarkable that the son of Kostya Tszyu and a former NSW State of Origin captain can combine to outsell not only Mundine and Green, but pugilist superstars Floyd Mayweather and Manny Pacquiao in this country.

It's understood that pre-sales for the Sydney Superfight have already surpassed Tszyu's previous bout against Jeff Horn, an event that stunned Main Event officials by outselling Horn-Mundine and Horn-Pacquiao.

No doubt COVID-19 played a role, with a number of sports and major global events cancelled amid lockdowns, increasing the appetite for live content, however, Tszyu's stunning performance also catapulted him into next phase of pay-per-view stardom.

No Limit Promotions, which promotes Tszyu and Gallen, then decided to put both men on the same card at Bankwest Stadium rather than on separate events, and it has been a masterstroke.

No Limit chief executive, the former NRL star George Rose, was in the Sydney Football Stadium on May 17, 2006, when Mundine defeated Green, and this will be the first stadium boxing event in the city since that famous night when the PPV record was set and remains unsurpassed.

"We'd love to break that record, it would be huge for us," Rose told The Daily Telegraph.

"If we don't do it now, we'll be looking for it in the next one. "We'll keep trying to chase those titles from our side of the fence, that's what we want to do.

"And for Tim, once he fights for a world title and -becomes a world champion, he's going to have that platform for everyone else to be a part of as well.

"It is epic, we went to Mundine-Green and we were kids then, watching the fight, we had tickets in the stands but we managed to jump the fence to get down on the grass.

"As boxing fans as kids, that was one of the coolest nights we were ever at in Sydney.

"The fact we're hosting the next stadium show in Sydney, it's surreal. "We've lined up the card to the point where every fight is going to be entertaining - we've got characters here in Australian boxing, quality fighters." Adding to the magnitude of the event is the WBO's announcement that super-welterweight champion Patrick Teixeira, of Brazil, must lock in his title defence by January 6.

Teixeira can't get out of Brazil due to COVID, and is unlikely to be able to secure travel to fight against No.1 contender Brian Castano within three weeks.

If he cannot fight, the WBO will strip him of the title and announce that Castano and Tszyu will fight for the vacant title, with Teixeira as No.1 contender to fight the winner once he can travel again.

Negotiations are already under way to host the potential Tszyu-Castano world title fight in Australia next year.

"I'm excited that we might be able to fight for a world title here, and Tim deserves it, he is at that level," Rose said.

"If he can put on a good performance against Bowyn Morgan he deserves the shot, and the WBO agrees."

BIGGEST PPV BOXING EVENTS IN AUSTRALIA 1. Anthony Mundine vs Danny Green May 17, 2006, Sydney. PPV buys: 200,000 2. Floyd Mayweather vs Manny Pacquiao May 2, 2015, Las Vegas. PPV buys: 195,000 3. Floyd Mayweather vs Conor McGregor August 26, 2017, Nevada. PPV buys: 190,000 4. Anthony Mundine vs Danny Green II February 3, 2017, Adelaide. PPV buys: 100,000 5. Tim Tszyu vs Jeff Horn August 26, 2020, Townsville. PPV buys: 94,000 6. Anthony Mundine vs Jeff Horn November 30, 2018, Brisbane. PPV buys: 73,000 7. Jeff Horn vs Manny Pacquiao July 2, 2017, Brisbane. PPV buys: 63,000
---
After lies, evasions, and threats it's up to China - not Canberra - to improve relations with us and the world

If the world stage were a schoolyard, China would be the oafish bully monstering smaller kids for their lunch money - and threatening payback if the teachers found out.

And if Australia's relationship with Beijing were taking place within the four walls of a suburban house rather than in the international arena, all our friends would be offering us a place to stay.

While it might horrify diplomats and exporters to hear this, the fact is we are rapidly approaching the point where Australia needs to acknowledge that China, at least as represented by the secretive, belligerent, and thin-skinned Chinese Communist Party, is not our friend.

Because while our relationship with the Chinese communist regime has always been, to use a Facebook term, complicated, the past three months have shown us just how fundamentally broken it is.

Even before Beijing undertook a comprehensive program to cover up the coronavirus and its origins - while still allowing international flights to spread it around the globe - our dealings with China were one-sided.

When last year the media raised the alarm of possible Chinese attempts to hack into Australian computer systems and MPs criticised China's aggression in the South China Sea, Beijing responded by putting the brakes on our coal clearing Chinese customs, using a variety of sort of plausible but really pretty spurious excuses to hold up the ships.

Although it was masked behind confused messages around needing to "test" coal more rigorously, no one watching was under the illusion that this was the behaviour of a bully: Let us do what we want, don't complain, or you'll get hurt.

This was just a prologue for Beijing's current modus operandi which consists of allowing a deadly pandemic to be unleashed upon the world, covering up its origins, gaslighting those who raise questions, and threatening economic harm - or worse - against those who press the point.

And to date, all efforts to find out exactly what happened in Wuhan have been met by threats, bluster, and distractions.

In response to a bipartisan effort to push Beijing to allow an independent inquiry into the virus, China's ambassador to Australia this week threatened us with a consumer boycott - the latest in a bizarre campaign to derail discussions of COVID-19's origins.

In March, Zhao Lijian, a spokesman for China's Ministry of Foreign Affairs, suggested that rather than a wet market or lab accident, the virus may have been spread by US Army athletes who were in Wuhan for an international military athletics -competition.

And just last week another foreign ministry spokesman, Geng Shuang, further tried to distract from China's culpability, saying, "AIDS was first discovered in the US in the 1980s and spread to the world, causing great agony for the world, has anyone held the US accountable?" Whatever you say, comrade.

Of course, had they been more transparent, thousands of lives could have been saved and the global economy might still be upright.

According to researchers at the University of Southampton in the UK, had Beijing been transparent about what was going on the spread of the coronavirus could have been reduced by 95 per cent now adds insult to injury.

Yet when doctors at two separate hospitals in Wuhan raised the alarm about a new virus jumping from human to human with the Chinese Centre for Disease Control in late December, their findings were squashed.

And, by the way, it's worth noting that it's not just with Australia that China is trying it on.

Recent months have seen Beijing raise the temperature in the disputed South China Sea, attempt to censor an EU report into the coronavirus, and seemingly co-opt the World Health Organisation.

All of which suggests that far from feeling strong and empowered, China - and particularly its leader, Xi Jinping - is feeling the pressure. Surely a truly confident nation with superpower aspirations would welcome the truth and the chance to make amends. In the meantime, in Australia, all of us from policy makers to citizens and consumers will have to ditch the globalist ethic that saw our manufacturing jobs shipped overseas for shiny baubles and service industry jobs.

Growth will have to be powered by reform and productivity and finding new industries in which to excel, rather than simply migration and selling raw materials for cheap consumer goods.

Our companies and corporate executives will, too, have to reorient themselves and remember they have obligations not just to shareholders, but Australians.

Everyone will need to be more sceptical about China - which includes our national broadcaster, the ABC, and anyone else who broadcasts Beijing's coronavirus numbers as fact.

Even local councils - I'm looking at you, Wagga Wagga - shouldn't let themselves be cowed or bullied into propagandistic "sister city" or other "friendship" arrangements. Likewise politicians like Victoria's Dan Andrews shouldn't be allowed to freelance negotiations with China's Belt and Road.

Importantly, none of this should reflect poorly on Australians of Chinese heritage, many of whom were among the very first to start self-isolating and practising social distancing in Australia.

Many of these Australians know too well, first-hand, the evil that occurs in the name of the Communist Party.Australians may have to endure some ongoing economic pain while this shift occurs, but the alternative - selling our independence slowly on the promise of foreign cash - would be far worse.
---
COVID-19 may have signalled the death of the multi-billion dollar TV sports rights deal.

As codes deal with enormous financial losses because of the pandemic, with little to no TV rights money without games being played, Global Media & Sports director Colin Smith said the AFL and NRL should not expect a bigger deal from Australian broadcasters in the future.

Smith said all the football codes needed to up their fan engagement, noting the industry pre-COVID-19 was already needing to "adapt and create" their products to attract and keep the next generation of supporters.

Smith said the pandemic has triggered a "reset button".

"It's going to be a complete reset," Smith said.

"It puts into question the multi-billion dollar deals. Future deals have got to come back to true economics either of subscribers or TV viewership. Those deals are going to have to stand on what will provide a commercial return for the broadcaster." "Sports and broadcasters have got to do more to really engage with the fans. I think that's been missing and they've got to do more to get more people watching it and interested in it and follow it." "The AFL has done a better job with this. Just look at their club memberships. The others? They have huge work to do, to re-engage, to bring back real rivalries either attending games or watching on TV or through their smartphone." Smith suggested the NRL needed to be more innovative and needs to start season 2021 with a bang.

"If I was running the NRL I would kick off my season with State of Origin," Smith said.

"That is the largest broadcast product in Australia bar none. That gets approximately 11 million viewers each year. Why not kick it off with a great start? A State of Origin match. And then restart the club competition with that impetus. Your fans have impetus.

"State of Origin is even big in Melbourne. It is seen as an iconic sporting event in Australia. If you look at it cumulatively, it is bigger than the NRL or AFL grand final." Smith said all broadcasters were challenged pre-COVID-19 with the rise of streaming services like Netflix, Amazon and Stan attracting viewers.

"Millennials and younger are not watching linear TV - they are watching sport and other content differently," Smith said. "The fragility of the sports system - that is spending up to watch you earn - when the piggy bank stops, then the whole economic system is unbelievably challenged." In 2015, the AFL struck a colossal new six-year, $2.508 billion broadcast rights agreement with Channel 7, Foxtel and Telstra. The deal runs from 2017 to 2022.

The NRL secured a $1.8 billion deal with the Nine Network, News Corp Australia, Foxtel, and Telstra for five years from 2018.

Smith said the possible seasons being placed on hold - or even not restarting because of COVID-19 pandemic - places the codes in a perilous state with some fans.

"Fans might say, I haven't missed it that much," Smith said. "What they've got to do now is engage them and then have some absolutely fantastic games that re-engage with the fans." Rugby Australia, who is the only major code without a broadcast rights deal beyond this year, has some challenges ahead.

"This needs to be the reset and re-engagement button for rugby," Smith said. "When I say reset, the critical question is what should SANZAAR look like in the future?"How will rugby in Australia re-engage and grow their fan base?"
---
Wake up and accept the needle Immunisation is a global health success story, saving millions of lives every year.

We now have vaccines to prevent more than 20 life-threatening diseases like influenza and measles.

It is shattering to read that 6 per cent of Australians definitely won't get any COVID-19 vaccine when it becomes available (Anti-vax may keep virus alive 21/11).

To make matters worse, large numbers are hesitant or haven't made up their minds.

The situation puts at risk hope that the vaccine will effectively end the pandemic.

It is further frustrating as two recent vaccine trials were reported to be more than 90 per cent effective.

Time is of the essence and we need to convince the doubters to rethink this issue through education.

Peter Penglis, Kambah, Act

"" " Kylie Lang (Don't let anti-vax loonies ruin our COVID recovery, 21/11) is absolutely right.

Just one "loony" refusing the "jab" could imperil hundreds of others who have yet to be vaccinated or who are in the 5 per cent for whom the vaccine has proved ineffective.

With an enemy that is so tiny yet deadly, and can multiply so rapidly, we cannot afford to leave uncovered the slightest chink in our anti-COVID armour. The consequences could be fatal.

Douglas Mackenzie, Deakin, ACT

"" " Put those who refuse the COVID vaccine into permanent lockdown. If they want to be selfish they need to be kept away from us, the inoculated.

Liz, Gosford War zone dangers and expectations a major issue As former Special Forces officer Heston Russell states in his article, "you don't read about what we had to do to support alliances and put ourselves at risk to maintain the situation in Afghanistan" (They all wanted to look at kill counts, 22/11).

Our soldiers were sent by Australia into a seriously dangerous war zone where the enemy didn't play by any rule book and where rules of engagement and outcomes were blurred.

The four-year inquiry, and now a special investigation, will result in Australia being targeted in future terrorist activities and undermine our response to them.

The standards set and the opinions expressed so far by our leaders are not helpful in this regard and many veterans are suffering.

Hopefully this special investigation will consider that our soldiers were sent into this danger by our government and defence leaders.

So where should the buck stop?

Peter Cattlin, Freshwater

Fears for defence future I have to pledge my full support to SAS men and women who serve in a war zone. I firmly believe these men and women are worn down by continuous deployment and having to face up to pure evil time and time again.

The worst of it is not over for them when they arrive home - they still have to battle bureaucracy over alleged war crimes.

Sure, these allegations have to be dealt with, but internally, not in the media. My greatest fear is who will protect us when terrorists come knocking at our door because no one sees a future in our defence forces.

David Penn, NSW

A big thank you, Terry A huge thank you to The Daily Telegraph business columnist Terry McCrann for his brilliant and fearless exposure of the deceit imposed on the Australian people by those in government, regardless of which political party is in power.

The latest issue he has highlighted is the move to replace a one-off property tax with a lifetime of perpetual property tax through unconscionable, unashamed, pure deception (Does NSW have a new tax for all, 20/11).

It is becoming extremely difficult to pick a party of choice during elections as the similarity between the major parties is astounding.

Saul Moss, Hamlyn Terrace

Koala care still a priority I am not sure about the latest moves in state parliament regarding koalas (Koala war is over & gum, 21/11).

I do hope our politicians are thinking of the koalas and not just the dollars. Our politicians have not passed the pub test often in the past. I have been camping many times when we have come across a inquisitive koala. They are very beautiful animals, especially the inquisitive ones. I would hate to only be able to see them in animal parks and zoos. Morty, Moruya

A gift great & grand I think the Queen and the Duke, like most grandparents and great grandparents, were very happy with the anniversary card made by Prince George, Princess Charlotte and Prince Louis (Anniversary gift for the Queen, 21/11).

They must be the most difficult of people to buy a gift for, but the card was priceless.

Being married for 73 years would also pose a problem. Which gem or precious metal would signify such a long time together? Such a milestone.

Marg Swindells, Castle Hill

Power of Maroon madness OK, can we stop with the Wayne Bennett coaching accolades; if he is that good, why hasn't he won a premiership since 2010?

The real reason is this Queenslander thing - in their minds they really are unconquerable at anything they do to the extent you could probably call it a disease, but they call it passion.

Woe betide any vehicle with NSW number plates at Origin time. They are tooted, cut off, abused and jammed. I know all this because I live among it and I'm Blue.

Jack Jackson, Burleigh Heads Building leadership a key Referring to the story detailing how 185 kids have been suspended from class in one school this year, we must ask why.

Is it lack of discipline training at home, in society or at school? There are too many kids out of control and in fights, rudeness is common, as is other disruptive behaviour.

This is a complex situation, however, students need to be encouraged to learn self-discipline.

Discipline is important in social development as well as for making their way in future lifestyle and working environments.

Being poor, socially disadvantaged or coming from an abusive environment may be factors, however, nonconformists are common across all school situations.

Suspension centres should be a last resort, but school rules and discipline are fundamental to school spirit and children bonding.

Student leadership promotion should start in primary school and be strengthened through high school.

Students and teachers should be encouraged in setting standards/rules to make a safe, anti-bullying, enjoyable educational environment.

Ron Brown, Ballina

Briefly ...

Dear China, if standing up for our freedoms and sovereignty offends you, good. If you think that we are going to apologise to you there's an old Australian saying: You're dreaming.

Dazza, Singleton "" " I for one will never consider buying a house that has moved to this new and improved property tax (Does NSW have a new tax for all, 20/11). Cap it at 20 years and then maybe.

Grant Paterson, Katoomba "" " Thank God I don't live in America. Democrat Joe Biden is to the left of our Greens Party and I believe will lead the western world to disaster - the same as the Greens would do to Australia if they somehow gained control.

Shaun Green, Hornsby "" " So any charges against SAS soldiers will likely take years to finalise, if ever. Meanwhile, everyone who served is left under a cloud.

Sean, Merriwa

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
CHINA has sunk to a new low in its propaganda war after a prominent official shared a fake image of an Australian Digger threatening to slit the throat of an Afghan child.

A furious Prime Minister Scott Morrison yesterday condemned the image - created by a self-described "wolf warrior painter" - as "repugnant" saying the Chinese government should be "totally ashamed" and apologise.

The violent image was shared by Beijing's foreign ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian on Twitter. Mr Zhao earlier this year described the Tiananmen Square massacre as simply a "political disturbance" for which the Chinese government's response was "fully correct".

The Australian government also appealed to Twitter directly to remove the "false" image but the social media giant did not respond to -requests about what action it would take.

The picture of a soldier holding a bloodied knife to the throat of an Afghan child covered in an Australian flag and holding a white lamb with the caption "Don't be afraid, we are coming to bring you peace" was reportedly created by a computer graphics artist in China.

In a tweet accompanying the image, Mr Zhao said: "Shocked by murder of Afghan civilians & prisoners by Australian soldiers. We strongly condemn such acts, & call for holding them -accountable".

Slamming the post Mr Morrison said: "It is deeply offensive to every Australian, every Australian who has served in that uniform, every Australian who serves in that uniform today … it is utterly outrageous and can't be justified on any basis whatsoever." Mr Morrison said the Chinese Government should be "totally ashamed of this post".

"It diminishes them in the world's eyes," he said.

The PM said there were undoubtedly tensions between the two nations, but "this is not how you deal with them".

"The way to deal with this is by engaging directly in discussions and dialogue between ministers and leaders," Mr Morrison said.

"Despite this terribly -offensive post, I would ask again and call on China to -re-engage in that dialogue." The Prime Minister said where there were incidents such as those detailed in the Brereton report, Australia dealt with them in a "transparent and open way".

"That is what a free, liberal democratic country does," he said. China has been accused of massacring thousands of citizens in the 1989 pro-democracy crackdown that culminated in tanks in Tiananmen Square.

It has also waged an ongoing campaign of repression against the Muslim ethnic Uighur population of Xinjiang, which human rights campaigners say includes forced sterilisation and mass concentration camps.

Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade secretary Frances Adamson called China's Ambassador to Australia to highlight the government's concerns about the Twitter post, but hours later the image remained online.

Foreign Minister Marise Payne said the tweet was "grossly offensive". "It is an appalling disgusting and outrageous piece of social media," she said. Ms Payne described the image as an example of the "absolute scourge of disinformation and misinformation" on social media. Labor's foreign affairs spokeswoman Penny Wong said she was also outraged and warned the Chinese government it would be judged on the world stage.

"It is gratuitous, inflammatory and it is deeply offensive," she said. "This is not the behaviour of a responsible, mature international power.

"These tactics will be met with unified condemnation in the Australian community." The image had been circulating on Chinese social media for at least six days before it was shared by Mr Zhao, and followed the release of the Brereton Report, which found "credible information" 25 special forces soldiers committed 39 murders of Afghan -civilians.

The artist behind the offensive picture, with the username "wuheqilin", appeared to welcome the endorsement of his image by a Chinese -government official.

Chinese officials last night doubled down with foreign ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying suggesting Mr Morrison's complaint meant Australia believed the war crimes were "justified".

"The Australian side (has) reacted so strongly to my colleague's Twitter, does that mean that they think the cold blood murder of Afghan innocent civilians is justified, while other people's condemnation of such crimes are not justified?" she said.

Diplomatic relations between Australia and China have soured in the past year, with Beijing -targeting a hit list of exports including barley, beef, wine, coal, copper, sugar and seafood. Earlier this month Mr Zhao confirmed the aggressive trade tariffs and attempts to block Australian goods from Chinese ports were in direct response to a list of "grievances" Beijing had with Canberra.

CHINA TENSIONS 19 November, 2019 China launches anti dumping investigation into Australian barley imports. 21 April, 2020 Prime Minister Scott Morrison discusses a probe into the origins of the coronavirus with world leaders.

26 April, 2020 China's Ambassador to the Australia Chinese ambassador Cheng Jingye threatens a boycott of Australian meat, wine and university students after Australia pushes for COVID-19 inquiry.

11 May, 2020 China bans imports from four major Australian meat processing plants. 18 May, 2020 China confirms 80.5 per cent tariff on Australian barley exports following its anti-dumping investigation.

18 August, 2020 China's Ministry of Commerce confirms it has started an anti-dumping investigation into Australian wine imports following a complaint from the China Alcoholic Drinks Association.

31 August, 2020 China announces a countervailing investigation into subsidised Australian wine imports.

31 August, 2020 China halts barley imports from Australia's CBH Grain, because it says harmful weeds were found in the cargoes.

12 October, 2020 China verbally bans Australian thermal and coking coal imports. 16 October, 2020 China "discourages" its spinning mills from using Australian cotton. 30 October, 2020 China customs bans imports of log timber from Queensland and grain imports from Emerald Grain, while it also delays imports of Australian lobster.

6 November, 2020 Australian coal, copper, wine, lobster, timber, sugar subject of verbal bans by China.

12 November, 2020 Chinese foreign ministry spokesman Wang Wenbin says Australia's excessive public criticisms of political issues in Xinjiang, Taiwan and Hong Kong, and its constant slander of China without evidence, has "poisoned" the relationship.

19 November 2020 China's foreign ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian says over the "past few years," Australia had made a "series of wrong moves" that Beijing blames entirely for bilateral tensions. These include criticising China's policies in Hong Kong, Xinjiang and Taiwan, banning Huawei from 5G rollout and advocating for "so-called 'independent international inquiry'" into COVID-19.

28 November, 2020 China imposes temporary anti-dumping tariffs on Australian wine of up to 212.1 per cent.

30 November, 2020 China's foreign ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian posts a false image of Australian soldier holding a knife to Afghan child's throat on Twitter.
---
GOVT HELP THERE'S now talk of the NRL pushing the state government for a boutique stadium at Liverpool on a site owned by Canterbury. It could be used for Canterbury and Wests Tigers games. The Dogs' Belmore HQ is unlikely to get funding and the club's deal is up at ANZ Stadium.

PICK PROP WE'VE been pushing the case for Roosters forward Lindsay Collins to play Origin this year, not that we should be helping out Kevin Walters with his Maroons selections.

On Friday night against the Broncos, Collins made an extraordinary 240m in just 55 minutes.

HAPLESS BULLDOGS TAKE A REAL KICKING THE Bulldogs are on the verge of imploding.

The team's winless start to the year, no major sponsor, no home ground, uncertainty over the future of coach Dean Pay, the standing down of club legend Steve Price and the unexplained return of Chris Anderson in an unofficial recruitment role has upset long-time fans.

Anderson stood down from the Bulldogs board last year when The Sunday Telegraph revealed his recruitment business had gone into liquidation, owing millions.

He was replaced on the club retention committee by his wife, Lynne Anderson, but player agents have revealed he's still unofficially involved behind the scenes - although the club denies this.

Meanwhile, Pay feels he's being sidelined from roster planning. The Dogs have a $3 million war chest to spend on new players for 2021. There is one major problem - potential recruits want to know who will be coaching the team.

This will force the club into making an early call on Pay, possibly even next week.

The other big issue concerns football club general manager Price, who was stood down when COVID-19 shut down the premiership, but has yet to return from Queensland.

The club surprisingly left him out of their 50-person bubble. Many blame the fact club legend Terry Lamb got caught at training last week shaking hands with players and breaking biosecurity protocols on the fact Price wasn't around to police the strict rules.

MITCH'S MUCH BETTER HALF MITCHELL Pearce is aiming to jam a wedding into the busiest year of his life. With the finals and Origin pushed back until late November, the Knights skipper and fiancee Kristin Scott have chosen a date in the week between Christmas and New Year.

They will tie the knot at Byron Bay and hope to invite 150 guests, but it will depend on the COVID-19 restrictions.

Blocker Roach's son, Liam, will be best man and the guest list will include Todd Carney, Boyd Cordner, Kalyn Ponga, Anthony Minichiello, David Gyngell and Nick Politis, plus his closest mates from Newcastle.

WHEEL DEAL MOST of the NRL's senior executives are about to go car hunting. The closure of Holden and their long-term sponsorship of the game means vehicles have to be handed back over the next few weeks. We're sure Roosters boss and automotive tycoon Nick Politis would love to help them out.
---
THERE are plans for New Zealand to take on Tonga in an end-of-year series to replicate a State of Origin-type contest between the international rivals.

League taskforce Project Apollo will today consider a proposal that would pit the two countries against each other in a three-game series to run at the same time as Origin in November. The winner of the series could potentially play Australia to round out the year.

The Kiwis coach Michael Maguire supports the idea. "I think it would be huge," he said. "I've been trying to push it in the background.

"There is a lot of talk about Origin, but the international game is a massive opportunity for the (Pacific) islanders in our game. It gives an opportunity for these guys and brings them together before the Rugby League World Cup (England, 2021).

"The concept would be excellent." Australia would almost certainly play host to the matches - depending on the travel restrictions.

The game is exploring ways to have an international window while Origin is played after the NRL grand final on October 25. That could include matches for England, Samoa and Fiji.

Costs and travel restrictions will be critical elements to these concepts progressing and also whether the broadcast partners have an appetite to show representative football.

Australia was due to tour England at the end of the year but that is almost certainly going to be scrapped because of COVID-19.

Tonga shone last year - beating Australia and Great Britain. They lost 34-14 to New Zealand last year in their only match since beating the Kiwis in the 2017 World Cup.

""" RETIRED Wests Tigers hooker Robbie Farah will conduct an online exercise session tomorrow to raise money for Beyond Blue.

Partnering with Vision Lane Cove, Farah hopes to raise $10,000 for the charity. "We know there is a direct link between physical and mental health, and we also know that during this time of lockdown people have found being confined incredibly challenging," Farah said.The session will start at 7am. Visit facebook.com/VisionPTLaneCove.
---
THE World Health Organisation has found it "impossible" to trace the origins of COVID-19 despite a 28-day investigation in Wuhan, dismissing suggestions it was leaked from a lab or crossed to humans at a seafood market.

The team handed down their findings at a press conference in Wuhan late yesterday, after a month of meetings and site visits in the Chinese city where the virus was first identified in December 2019.

WHO scientists, appearing alongside their Chinese counterparts, said the most likely possibility was that the virus spilled over from an animal into humans. Frozen food was also being probed as a potential source.

Peter Ben Embarek, the head of the WHO mission, said: "The laboratory incident hypothesis is extremely unlikely to explain the introduction of the virus into the human population." Dr Embarek said the WHO investigation had uncovered new information but had not dramatically changed the picture of the outbreak.

Professor Liang Wannian, who heads the Chinese team of experts, ruled out the Huanan Seafood Market as an origin source.

"While some of the early cases had an association with the Huanan seafood market, others were associated with another market and some no market at all," Prof Liang said.

He said the team believed the virus originated in animals - likely bats or pangolins - but the intermediate hosts that allowed it to jump to humans are "yet to be identified".

Prof Liang said minks and cats were also potential virus reservoirs but he said there was "not adequate enough" research proving this.

He also said no bats in the wild in China had been found to be carrying viruses that may have mutated into COVID-19.

The virus could have been circulating in other regions before it was identified in the central Chinese city of Wuhan at the end of 2019, he said.

The WHO team agreed with his assessment, with Dr Embarek adding: "We can also agree we have found evidence of wider circulation in December not just cluster outbreak in market, also circulated outside market."

KEY FINDINGS ■ Lab theory 'extremely unlikely'

■ Huanan Seafood Market unlikely to be original source of outbreak

■ Frozen food is being probed as a potential carrier of the virus ■ Study points to virus originating in bats - but it is unlikely they were in Wuhan
---
FOOTY fans will be slugged $50 to watch a proposed Kangaroos v All Blacks match on a pay-per-view network, just like a major fight or UFC event.

Promoters need the television sales, worth about $6 million, to pay the NRL and New Zealand Rugby Union $8 million each to take part.

The Main Event-style coverage will face legal issues because free-to-air broadcaster Channel 9 has the rights to all international rugby league. There is also the potential backlash to consider ... the case of many footy fans struggling in the COVID-19 environment to even put food on the table, let alone having to pay to watch an exhibition game.

Even with the pay-per-view sales, it is doubtful the game will go ahead this year.

Promoters also need $6 million from the Queensland government and tourism to meet their budget.

This is highly unlikely with the state's borders closed and the fact the game will not attract interstate or overseas visitors.

Also, the government will only allow maximum crowds of 25,000 at Suncorp. There is more chance of a 2021 fixture, but not necessarily in Brisbane. NSW's new stadiums boss Tony Shepherd is on record as saying he wants to attract more big-time sports to Sydney. He can offer ANZ Stadium and the opportunity to sell 85,000 tickets - 30,000 more than Suncorp. However, the biggest hurdle is the NRL clubs. Many of them believe they have no obligation to release their stars unless it is for State of Origin or international rugby league events.
---
NRL DRAWS UP SCHEDULE WORK on the 2021 NRL draw is well advanced.

Fox Sports and Channel 9 have chosen their preferred games and clubs have submitted their specific requests.

Venue availability has been factored in and all that is left now is for the NRL computer program to start crunching the data and spit out draft draws until the optimum outcome is achieved. All going well, the draw could be out by the end of November.

You can expect the season will open with the Roosters v Rabbitohs, which will be even spicier considering Nick Politis looks like pinching teenage sensation Joseph Suaalii from Redfern.

SLEEP TO BEAT ORIGIN FATIGUE AFTER the toughest of NRL seasons, Blues coach Freddy Fittler will be ramming home the importance of sleep to his players during the Origin series.

"I find the players have more clarity, more focus, their reaction times are better and they make better decisions on the field if they are well rested," he said. "It's important players get as much sleep as possible." Fittler has taken professional advice from the medical experts at ResMed and is now an ambassador for the company.

(new item with tearout)

STAYING ISOLATED NRL referees are the forgotten victims of the COVID-19 restrictions in place for most of the season.

Just like the players, the refs have had to comply with strict protocols limiting their contact with the outside world since the competition resumed in May. A small group will continue to be segregated after the grand final in preparation for the Origin series before getting only a short break then starting all over again in preparation for the 2021 season.

BELLYACHE'S GRAND FINAL HISTORY CRAIG Bellamy knows all about the pressure from grand final day. This is from the Big League program way back in 1990 when, as a halfback, Bellyache skippered the Canberra Raiders in the reserve-grade grand final against a Broncos team that included the great centre Steve "Pearl" Renouf.

THE MASK MERCHANDISE MADNESS CLUB-branded face masks have been the hottest merchandise item of the NRL finals and there will be scores of Panthers and Storm masks in the crowd tonight.

Our great mate, league legend Peter Wynn, said his sports store had sold face masks "in their thousands" during the finals, with massive demand for all Panthers merchandise.

"Penrith jerseys, grand final T-shirts, caps and scarfs have all been flying out the door but the demand for masks has been something else because it's part of the look this year," Wynn said. "It's all about showing your teams colours while staying COVID-safe." Fans are being strongly encouraged to take a mask to the grand final and wear it getting to and from the stadium, and when moving around inside the venue.
---
Knights' Origin star victim of repeated head blows THE football career of Queensland Maroons and Newcastle Knights forward Tim Glasby is over, with the NRL approving his medical retirement on the basis of repeated -concussions.

The hard-working State of Origin forward was notified last week of the NRL's decision to ratify his retirement on medical grounds after two months of assessing his case. Glasby will retire as a tough and influential forward for both the Knights and his previous club, Melbourne Storm, with his career featuring a premiership ring from 2017 and 138 first-grade appearances.

News Sport first revealed the serious concerns for Glasby's playing future and more importantly his health in July after the 31-year-old father of two had suffered ongoing concussion symptoms from repeated head knocks.

Glasby's final game was against North Queensland, where he suffered a HIA and failed to return to the field during the Round 7 clash in June.

It was his second concussion this year while Glasby was stood down for a game last year after suffering two head knocks in three weeks.

As a result of the concussion against the Cowboys, Glasby underwent a series of neurological tests.

He visited the Sports Concussion Clinic at the University of Newcastle, working with leading neurologist Chris Levi.

With the respected forward's welfare their priority, the Knights informed the NRL of their request to formally apply for medical retirement in July.

It's understood Glasby, who played five State of Origin games for the Maroons, is comfortable with the decision to retire and in the knowledge that by putting his health first, he can focus on his post-football career path as a financial planner.

The Rockhampton junior, who made his NRL debut in 2013 with the Storm before going on to win the 2017 premiership with Melbourne, will remain inside the Knights COVID-19 "bubble" for the rest of the season with his big-game experience required to help guide the club into the first finals series in seven years.

Glasby was off-contract at the end of next season and while his premature retirement is unfortunate, his departure will provide salary cap room for the Knights to retain several off-contract stars, or recruit externally.

TIM GLASBY'S KNOCKS August 31, 2018: Round 25: Playing for Storm v Penrith. Ruled out by half-time due to concussion August 12, 2019: Round 21: Knights v Eels. Stood down for one week suffering two knocks in three weeks May 31, 2020: Round 3: Knights v Penrith returns from HIA to play 60-minutes June 27, 2020: Round 7: Knights v Cowboys lasts just 21-mins after failing HIA June 28-July 19, 2020: Unavailable for selection
---
"COVID-19 turned the world on its head, "destroying hope and taking 1.5 million lives so far. Now, at last, the tide of battle"may be about to turn. David Mills reports"

ALL being well, the global fightback against the coronavirus will finally begin this Thursday, when the first jabs of Pfizer's COVID-19 vaccine are expected to be administered in the US and Britain.

In the US, the vaccinations come as the nation braces for more cases and even more fatalities in the wake of the Thanksgiving holiday, adding to an already gruesome death tally of 271,000. Dr Anthony Fauci, the head of the White House corona-virus Task Force, has warned of a "surge upon a surge" in new cases.

But those jabs should turn the tide of a battle that up until now has been a total bust for the human race.

The virus has been suppressed in a few pockets, such as Australia, New Zealand and Taiwan, but it has rampaged in most places, destroying hopes and taking 1.5 million lives.

Time and again, worst-case scenarios have prevailed. There were optimistic forecasts the virus would fade with the coming of the northern summer, like SARS in 2003; others thought herd immunity or so-called "miracle drugs" like hydroxychloraquixine would eventually stop it. All those hopes came to nought.

A more recent suggestion - that the virus is slowing down - may not hold up to scientific scrutiny either.

"There is no real evidence that the virus has changed massively in terms of its virulence; it's pretty much acting in the same way it has always acted," Melbourne epidemiologist Hassan Vally said.

The Associate Professor from La Trobe University said while the mortality rate was coming down, that might be due to what we are doing, not what the virus is doing.

"If you're testing only those who have severe disease, you'll get a very high mortality rate, and that's certainly what we saw very early on, -especially in places such as Italy that were overwhelmed," he said.

SMOKE AND MIRRORS The origins of the virus are still being contested, but Professor Peter Collingnon, an infectious disease expert at the ANU, says there is compelling evidence that the virus was in Paris in December 2019.

"There's no doubt it was circulating in Wuhan in October/November, and probably earlier," he said. "China must have known it was person-to-person (transmission) by December. They already had the out-break. That misled a lot of people." Beijing also failed to restrict air travel until after the Chinese New Year on January 25, Professor Collingnon said, adding that a flight from Wuhan might have taken the virus to Milan. Italy confirmed its first case on January 29.

There is suspicion Beijing never told the full story. Even today, China claims just over 4600 fatalities, putting it at No. 38 on the tally board of coronavirus deaths per nation.

But whatever China's failures, others argue they were soon compounded by the World Health Organisation and other agencies.

"We have seen the WHO initially denying the pandemic, denying person-to-person transmission, then denying asymptomatic transmission, and then denying airborne transmission, always far behind the scientific evidence," Professor Raina MacIntyre from the University of NSW said.

"We have seen public health agencies suggest that contact tracing was not needed, displaying complete ignorance about the fundamentals of epidemic control. So there has been a lot of smoke and mirrors."

THE HORROR DEEPENS But there was no masking the horror of the virus when it hit Italy. Within two months of the country's first confirmed case, nearly a thousand people were dying every day.

There were shocking images: nurses collapsed from exhaustion, deserted Venetian piazzas, churches filled with coffins. And the horror deepened when it emerged that Italian doctors were being advised to prioritise younger patients over the elderly as intensive care units -became inundated.

The virus quickly metastasised around the globe. Eighteen countries reported cases by the end of January. By mid-March it was 121.

February brought with it a slew of first deaths: Spain and Japan on the 13th; Iran on the 19th; South Korea on the 20th; France on the 26th; the US on the 29th.

And the news only got more shocking. March 8: Italy became the first country to enter full lockdown. March 16: the Dow Jones suffered its biggest drop in history. March 24: Japan postponed the Tokyo Olympics. Landmark locations around the world emptied as lockdowns became ubiquitous and tourism ground to a halt. From Tokyo's Shibuya Crossing to St Peter's Square in Rome and New York's Times Square, public spaces became eerily deserted.

THE ABSENCE OF HUMANS Airline passenger numbers dropped by nearly 2.9 billion for the year, prompting major airlines to stop -operations. The cruise industry dropped anchor entirely after a string of disasters, most notably a failed quarantine on board the Diamond Princess while it sat off the port of Yokohama; in the end nearly 20 per cent of its 3700 passengers and crew would test positive.

Global carbon emissions dropped by 17 per cent by April, according to Australia's CSIRO, while NASA satellite photos showed remarkable -improvements in air quality. India's Taj Mahal looked its best in years after a 60 per cent drop in pollution.

The absence of humans created effects that nobody saw coming. Coyotes were spotted on the streets of San Francisco, while in Thailand, the drop in tourist numbers led to mass brawls among the monkey population for food scraps.

Celebrities testing positive provided further shocks. First it was Tom Hanks and Rita Wilson on March 11, then Prince Charles on March 25, and then Boris Johnson on March 27.

The British Prime Minister's near-death experience was just one dramatic moment in a year of them. The UK chose first not to rush into harsh lockdowns, arguing compliance fatigue would weaken the -effect of tough measures when they were needed most, before abandoning the strategy as cases and deaths skyrocketed. According to data from Johns Hopkins University, the UK has the third-worst case to fatality ratio, behind Mexico and Iran.

AMERICA THE GRAVE Sweden's light-touch response to the outbreak was hailed by some commentators who despaired as the world's economies nosedived - but the experiment was a failure, said Professor Vally.

"The other countries in Scandinavia are about a similar size, and all of them went into lockdown and Sweden didn't, so you can compare the outcome - and pretty much on every measure Sweden has done worse, and in terms of death it's done terribly," he said.

Others might point to the US under Donald Trump as the perfect -example of how not to respond to a pandemic.

March 31 modelling predicted US -fatalities could end up being between 100,000 and 240,000, but that upper limit was surpassed in November, and it is still climbing rapidly.

While Trump was criticised for downplaying the seriousness of the outbreak, suggesting untested cures, criticising the scientists who could assist in the fight, and singlehand-edly turning mask-wearing into a party-political statement, it should be noted that popular rallies on both the left (for Black Lives Matter) and the right (against state lockdowns) probably contributed to the further spread of the disease.

And Trump's COVID-19 res-ponse was not unique. Brazil's Jair Bolsanaro and Mexico's Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador were slammed for failing to slow the disease as death tolls shot up. In a November press conference, Bolsanaro chided Brazilians for being "a country of sissies" because "everyone is going to die".

While Trump himself fought off the virus not long after he tested positive in October, COVID-19 would play a massive role in his electoral defeat on November 3.

One week later, the first results of final vaccine trials filtered through, offering real hope for the first time in 2020. But the situation remains -desperate in most countries.

TRIUMPH OF SCIENCE Second national lockdowns ended in UK and France this week, but new cases per day were still over 4000 in the former and 12,000 in the latter. (England will instead move to a three-tier system of restrictions.) Spain, Italy, Turkey and Lebanon have all implemented curfews, while Germany is continuing its partial lockdown.

With global infections still going up at more than half a million every day, all hopes are pinned on the vaccines. Professor Vally said their speedy arrival would vindicate science at the end of a year in which it has been tested like never before.

"There have been a lot of vocal anti-science people, but they are in the minority and people have shown when there is a threat like this, they want to hear from scientists, and people respected politicians who -deferred to the scientists," he said. "To get these vaccines in the time that they have taken so far has been nothing short of brilliant. And that's taken scientists, governments and pharmaceutical companies to all work together for the greater good."
---
THERE'S SO MUCH INFORMATION FLOATING AROUND, CLAIMING TO BE THE LATEST FACTS ON CORONAVIRUS - AND MOST OF IT IS SIMPLY A LOAD OF GARBAGE. DAVID MEDDOWS LOOKS AT THE MOST COMMON MYTHS AND WHY THEY ARE SIMPLY NOT TRUE.

Myth: Sitting in the sun will cure coronavirus if you have it or prevent you from getting it.

Reality: The World Health Organisation (WHO) says exposure to the sun has no impact on coronavirus infection and countries with hot climates are reporting cases.

Myth: Holding your breath for 10 seconds without discomfort means you don't have coronavirus.

Reality: While shortness of breath and a dry, hoarse cough are symptoms of COVID-19, they aren't always present early. Authorities have debunked this myth and have even said it can be dangerous.

Myth: COVID-19 only affects older people / is only serious in those above 70 / only kills older people.

Reality: Babies as young as a few weeks old have tested positive, and in NSW the largest age group of confirmed cases is 20-29. Cases are also being reported every day of younger victims dying from the virus.

Myth: Coronavirus can be caught through drinking tap water.

Reality: There is no evidence to suggest that the virus can be transmitted through our water supply. All the major water corporations, including Sydney Water, have stated our drinking water is safe to use and there is no need to buy bottled water.

Myth: The virus started from someone eating bat soup.

Reality: It is too early for scientists to pinpoint exactly where COVID-19 originated. Researchers have found similarities to coronaviruses found in bats but also in pangolins. In either case, the virus is highly unlikely to jump directly to humans but instead more likely to have passed through an intermediary host such as civets or ferrets.

Myth: Spraying yourself with chlorine or alcohol will kill the coronavirus. Reality: Not only has the WHO shot this myth down, it has warned that it can be dangerous to areas such as your eyes, nose and mouth. It also suggested it wouldn't be too good for your clothes either.

Myth: COVID-19 is just like flu.

Reality: This new coronavirus and influenza do share many common symptoms - coughing, fever and joint pain are just a few - but scientists warn this virus is much more contagious than the flu and, while research is still ongoing, the belief is it has a much higher mortality rate than the flu.

Myth: Pets, especially cats and dogs, are spreading the virus to their owners. Reality: The WHO says there is no evidence that your pets can spread the disease.

Myth: The virus was created in a Chinese lab and is a form of genetic warfare aimed at making China the ruler of the world.

Reality: It is natural in origin. A team of researchers including Kristian Andersen, an associate professor of immunology and microbiology at Scripps Research, Robert Garry of Tulane University, Edward Holmes of the University of Sydney, Andrew Rambaut of University of Edinburgh and W. Ian Lipkin of Columbia University recently published those findings in the journal Nature Medicine.

Myth: Drinking water every 15 minutes will flush out the virus. Reality: An email that was doing the rounds in the early stages of this pandemic suggested drinking water regularly would flush the virus down your throat to be killed by your stomach acids. This has been debunked by leading health authorities, who point out there are often millions of virus particles being ingested and they can enter through your eyes and nose too.

Myth: Once you have coronavirus you have it for life.

Reality: Like other viruses, you fully recover from COVID-19. Some patients will become extremely ill and others will tragically die but the vast majority of people will make a full recovery.

Myth: Wearing a mask will prevent you from getting coronavirus. Reality: NSW Health does not recommend a face mask for the general population, saying they should be used by those who have the virus or are showing symptoms. There is mixed advice on this, with some countries such as South Korea, where the spread was slow and the death rate low, having most of its citizens wearing masks in public. Many experts agree that cheap or makeshift masks still have a high potential of letting the virus in.

Myth: Hand dryers can kill COVID-19.

Reality: There is no evidence that would suggest this is the case, with NSW Health saying hand dryers could potentially help spread the disease if someone who hasn't adequately washed their hands is using one.

Myth: Drinking alcohol protects you against the virus.

Reality: Unfortunately not.

Myth: Mosquitos can carry and transmit the coronavirus.

Reality: COVID-19 is respiratory virus that is transmitted primarily through droplets from the nose or mouth and the WHO says there has been no evidence to date that mosquitoes, who transmit disease such as malaria through blood, can pass on this virus.

Myth: The virus started from someone eating bat soup.Reality: It is too early for scientists to pinpoint exactly where COVID-19 originated. Researchers have found similarities to coronaviruses found in bats but also in pangolins. In either case, the virus is highly unlikely to jump directly to humans but instead more likely to have passed through an intermediary host such as civets or ferrets.
---
PENRITH star Nathan Cleary admitted yesterday he "messed up" by dancing with a group of young women inside his home and disobeying social distancing protocols, but said he did not tell the NRL about the existence of videos because "they didn't ask me about them".

Police will not take action against the Panthers halfback because the incident took place inside his own home, but the 22-year-old is bracing for heftier fines from the NRL after the emergence of two TikTok videos of him dancing with the women.

Cleary told The Daily Telegraph yesterday he regretted filming the two now-deleted videos with the women in the sitting room of his Penrith home.

He earlier told the league's integrity unit he was unaware photographs had been taken of him during an uninvited, impromptu stop-in on Anzac Day which landed him a $4000 NRL-imposed fine.

"I messed up. I spoke to the integrity unit about what happened but they didn't ask me about the TikTok videos, they just asked me about the pictures and I've already told them about that," Cleary said yesterday afternoon through the crack of his front door.

"I wish I hadn't done the video, just got carried away in the moment. I was stupid. I messed up." "I'm just finding the whole social distancing and isolation stuff too much. "It's not something anyone has ever gone through before. It's difficult. "I regret doing the video.

"If they fine me more I'll deal with that at the time.

"I'm just going to wait and see what happens when I speak to the integrity unit." After being shown the two videos yesterday morning, the game's governing body said it would review the footage. However, Cleary has been cleared by police because, as the occupier of the home, he was not deemed to have broken COVID-19 rules.

The women who visited the home Cleary shares with fellow Penrith player Tyrone May could face fines of $1000.

While fellow NRL stars Latrell Mitchell and Josh Addo Carr were each fined $20,000 ($50,000 with 60 per cent suspended) and issued with a one-game suspended sentence for their social distancing breaches, Cleary was hit with only a $4000 punishment ($10,000 with 60 per cent suspended) and a one-game suspended ban.

In explaining the large discrepancy between the punishments on Tuesday, acting NRL CEO Andrew Abdo (pictured right) said it was deemed Cleary's interaction with the women was unexpected, as opposed to the planned camping trip embarked on by Mitchell and Addo-Carr.

In regards to photographs that emerged on Tuesday showing Cleary sitting on the lounge as the women sat on his lap, the Panthers star said "in the time they were here there was a photo that was taken that I had no idea about until this morning".

However, these videos clearly show Cleary partici-pating in TikTok posts for the popular social media platform.

On Tuesday, Cleary said he was sorry and "stuffed up".

"My sister's friends and girls I have grown up with were drinking down the road on the street," he told Nine News.

"They came by and popped in and said they were just waiting for an Uber before they went to someone else's house." He said the girls would have been drinking in his home for about 10 minutes. The NSW Origin star sent his teammates an apology and had to tell his coach and father Ivan Cleary.

"I explained the situation to him and he said you shouldn't have done that," he told Nine News.

"It was very hard, I had a sick feeling in my stomach the whole time. "Not only is he my coach but my dad at the same time." ARL Commission chairman Peter V'landys declared on Tuesday that the breaches by the stars would serve as a "final warning" to all other NRL players about strictly following the COVID-10 guidelines and in terms of punishments "the next one will be harsher".

"We've given them the benefit of the doubt in this instance. Out of every negative is a positive and the positive here is that every player is on notice," V'landys said.

"Their actions are extremely important during this pandemic crisis." Nine commentator and former Penrith football boss Phil Gould has called on Addo-Carr, Mitchell and Cleary to be banned for the remainder of the NRL season.

Only a day after declaring Mitchell and Addo-Carr should be outed for the rest of the year after breaking the COVID-19 regulations, Gould suggested the same should now happen to Cleary - the playmaker he helped bring into both the NRL and NSW Origin side.

Gould took to Twitter on Monday to write: "No excuse. Serious breach. Granted Nathan says the incident was not planned, which obviously differs from the Josh/Latrell situation. However, players need to be vigilant. They need to protect themselves, their teammates, and the game. For mine, blanket penalties should apply."Asked if Cleary should also be banned for a year, Gould replied: "Absolutely. It's irresponsible."
---
Australia is enduring economic challenges because China cannot cope with our demands for an investigation into the origins of the coronavirus.

For a mob that wishes to be perceived as a major global influence, China's communist dictatorship is remarkably petty and thin-skinned.

To this point, China has already put tariffs or embargoes on numerous Australian exports. Unable to deal with Australia on anything like a serious diplomatic level, China instead uses brute economic force.

It's the dictatorship's only negotiating tactic. We either run quiet on the origins of the corona-virus, and the need to understand the source in case of future outbreaks, or China will hurt our farmers, winegrowers and broader agricultural sector.

Thankfully, the Australian government has refused to yield, despite China's latest vindictive move - cutting Australian wheat imports to the lowest level since 2011.

This strategy seems especially targeted, considering the bumper wheat crop for Australian farmers. Forecasts tip a 31 million tonne result, nearly double the previous outcome.

Besides our farmers, the biggest losers out of this will be China's own citizens. They are already paying over the odds for other high-quality Australian products and now will be pushed financially towards second-rate grain.

In that light, it is worth considering how China might behave towards Australia if it had greater punitive powers over us than barriers to trade.

For example, just look at how China is treating one of its own citizens after she sought to investigate the beginnings of COVID-19 in Wuhan.

Former lawyer turned citizen journalist Zhang Zhan travelled to the pandemic epicentre in February, and subsequently reported on the detention of other like-minded independent journalists by Chinese authorities.

Additionally, Zhang reported government harassment of families of coronavirus victims who demanded accountability.

Then China's tyrants stepped in. Zhang was arrested in May.

Charged in early November with "picking quarrels and provoking trouble" and "causing the public order to be seriously chaotic", Zhang has now been sentenced. She will be imprisoned for four years - for reporting.
---
DIPLOMACY ON THE MENU

A SENIOR Chinese diplomat has claimed COVID-19 may not have originated in Wuhan, accused Australia of "whining" about Beijing's influence and denied it is using "bullying" trade tactics.

In a rare public appearance, deputy head of mission at the Chinese Embassy Minister Wang Xining acknowledged the coronavirus was first "identified" and "reported" in Wuhan, but that did not mean it was the source.

"I think it is up to the -scientists to find out the origin, and also how it has been dealt with by different governments," he said.

Mr Wang described Australia's proposal for an independent inquiry into the coronavirus pandemic as "shocking" and claimed it "hurts the feelings" of Chinese people.

The top Chinese diplomat was served up a meal of Australian beef and barley with a side of red wine ahead of his speech at the National Press Club in Canberra Wednesday - a not so subtle reference to the three sectors Beijing has targeted in its escalating trade war. But he dismissed suggestions Australia was being "targeted" with trade sanctions due to its pursuit of a COVID-19 -inquiry, saying the recent launch  of an investigation into wine was not  a -"coercive move" by the Chin-ese government.

Mr Wang also defended China's controversial programs, including Confucius -Institutes and the Belt and Road Initiative, warning Australia would not "enjoy today's economic affluence, cultural diversity and intellectual richness" without "accepting some foreign influence".

"I think people are smart enough to decide what influence is good and worth considering and what is bad and must be fended off," he said.

"It won't affect Australians' own choice of your political and social structure, I don't see any reason for whining about your constitutional -fragility and your intellectual vulnerability." Mr Wang also said China "respects the traditional relationship" between Australia and the US, acknowledging their shared history during the war.

"To have an alliance is not a problem," he said. But he indicated there was a problem if Australia turned on a "a third party with the strength of that alliance" with the US.

In his speech Mr Wang said Australia and China may "disagree on some issues" but the partnership will not be "wrecked" as long as goodwill was presented.

Mr Wang conceded it was "no easy task" to keep a partnership in "good shape". "It takes concerted determination and joint effort to make it thrive," he said. "A married couple knows this.

"While a rift between husband and wife hurts one family, a rift between two countries hurts millions." Liberal MP Dave Sharma told The Daily Telegraph it was "inconsistent" of China to "carry on about their own feelings" while accusing Australia of "whining".

He said if getting to the bottom of what caused the death of more than 800,000 people worldwide generated some "hurt feelings" then "that is the least of our concerns".

Mr Sharma said China was not doing itself any favours by trying to spread "alternative theories" about the source of COVID-19. "I think it discredits China, a country that has aspirations to global leadership," he said.

Mr Sharma said Australian ministers had been "very upfront" about their desire to speak with Chinese counterparts labelling Mr Wang's claims the lack of communication was only due to protocol was "disingenuous".

"I welcome his calls for a constructive, forward looking relationship, but obviously to have that you end to be prepared to talk to one another." Acting chief medical officer Paul Kelly said the Australian government was "very interested" in the -origins of COVID-19 to ensure lessons can be learned for -future pandemics.

"We know that the first cases reported … came from Wuhan," he said. University of Sydney foreign relations expert James Curran said the overall tone of Mr Wang's speech indicated a "significant" shift away from the aggressive language deployed by Chinese officials in recent months. "We may well be seeing the beginning of a thaw to the deep freeze into which Beijing has put (our) relationship," he said.
---
Our expert panel - Allen Cheng, professor of infectious diseases epidemiology School of Public Health and Preventive Medicine, Monash University, and chairman of the Advisory Committee for Vaccines and co-chair of the Australian Technical Group on Immunisation (ATAGI); Professor Terry Nolan, head of vaccine and immunisation research group Doherty Institute; and Professor Paul Offit, director of the Vaccine Education Centre and professor of paediatrics in the Division of Infectious Diseases at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, USA - fact check your vaccine questions with JANE HANSEN

"WILL THE VACCINES COVER""THE MUTANT STRAINS?

All viruses mutate over time and the UK strain and South African strain have posed new challenges, but experts believe all the vaccines offer some degree of protection against these new strains.

"The existing vaccines are not affected by most of the mutant strains that have occurred so far, with the exception of the South African origin variant known as B1.351. It is possible that vaccine protection may be less effective against mild disease if exposed to this variant, but we do not know yet if there is any reduction in more severe disease protection," Prof Nolan said.

"In any case, all manufacturers are already working on new versions of their vaccines that will be effective against the mutation variants."

WILL I STILL HAVE TO SOCIAL DISTANCE?

Social distancing has been an effective tool pre-vaccine, but for the time being, we will have to continue social distancing until we know if the vaccine prevents transmission or just prevents infection.

"Yes, we will have to keep social distancing, at least until we are confident that we have good population vaccine acceptance and herd immunity," Prof Nolan said. "If travelling to countries that do not have high vaccine acceptance, until it is better understood if our vaccinations also protect at high levels against asymptomatic transmission, we will have to accept that we may get the virus and possibly pass it on to someone else who is vulnerable and not vaccinated."

WHAT IF I HAVE ALLERGIES?

Some people with severe allergies have reacted to both the AstraZeneca and the Pfizer vaccines. There are now warnings for those with allergies.

Safety monitoring of the Pfizer vaccine detected 21 cases of anaphylaxis among the first 1.9 million doses administered. AstraZeneca's vaccine has been associated with 30 cases of anaphylaxis out of just over three million administered doses.

All patients recovered after adrenaline was administered. The Therapeutic Goods Administration advises people receiving the Pfizer vaccine to check with their doctor if they have had a severe allergic reaction or breathing problems after any other vaccine or after the first dose of the COVID vaccine.

For the Vaccine AstraZeneca vaccine it advises people check with their doctor if they have ever had a severe allergic reaction (anaphylaxis) after any other vaccine injection.

CAN I STILL TRAVEL INTERNATIONALLY IF I DON'T GET THE VACCINE? Australia's chief medical officer Professor Paul Kelly has said international border closures will be "one of the last things" to change after the COVID-19 vaccine rollout. Each country is likely to set their own rules for accepting international visitors who have been vaccinated.

CAN THE VACCINE STOP COVID?

It won't necessarily stop you getting the virus, and you may not know you have been infected because the vaccines reduce severe disease, Prof Nolan said.

"We are waiting to see more data whether the vaccine protects against getting the infection. The ideal is if you have been vaccinated you are not only protected from getting disease, but protected from giving the virus to someone else," Prof Nolan said.

THE VACCINE CAUSES FLU-LIKE ILLNESS, WHY?

A third of the participants in the Pfizer placebo group reported fatigue and headache, but this is similar to all other existing vaccines.

"I think there's good evidence that the vaccine does cause a sore arm (as pretty much all injections do) and a fever in some people, and this was more than the saline placebo in the Pfizer trial and similar to the meningococcal control in the AstraZeneca trial. When the vaccine gets rolled out, we would routinely warn people that they will probably not feel well the following day and may get a fever, and actually this is a sign that the immune system is responding appropriately," Prof Cheng said.

WILL I HAVE TO PAY FOR THE VACCINE?

All Australians will be offered a COVID-19 vaccine free of charge and doctors will bulk bill the consultation as well. The vaccine is not mandatory.

The first lot of doses in phase 1A will be offered to high-priority frontline workers in border protection, hospitals and aged-care homes. These vaccines will be rolled out through hospitals.

The next phase for the elderly and vulnerable will be rolled out through general practice.

Unlike other childhood vaccines, if you choose not to have a COVID-19 vaccine, government payments will not be affected.

CAN A VACCINATED PERSON SPREAD COVID TO THE UNVACCINATED OR VULNERABLE? This is possible because the vaccine is designed to stop you getting seriously ill. Prof Nolan says the vaccine won't necessarily stop you getting the virus, and you may not even know you are infected.

Less symptoms like sneezing, runny nose and coughing may reduce spread, but it is unknown whether the vaccinated will not spread asymptomatic disease. England's deputy chief medical officer Jonathan Van-Tam had previously said scientists "Do not yet know the impact of the vaccine on transmission" and that it was possible to contract the virus in the weeks after receiving the jab.

HOW CAN YOU GET A VAX APPOINTMENT?

Patients will be able to make a vaccine appointment by using the GP clinic's existing booking system either by phone, online or through a booking agency like Hotdoc.It will be up to individuals to work out when they are eligible for a COVID-19 jab and to make their own appointment. All approved COVID-19 vaccination clinics will be listed on Healthdirect's National Health Services Directory, including their contact details and their online booking services (if available). If a patient requires help in locating a suitable clinic they can contact the National Coronavirus Hotline 1800 020 080 for support.

www.health.gov.au/ for the latest information.

CAN THE PFIZER VACCINE CAUSE INFERTILITY?

Social media and anti-vax sites have spread this rumour and as usual, it is incorrect. The claim comes from a protein in the mRNA vaccines which is similar to a protein necessary for the formation of the placenta.

"There is no evidence and no credible biologic mechanism that supports this claim. The coronavirus spike protein is very different to the placental syncytin protein," Prof Nolan said.

Pregnant women were excluded from the initial trials, but pregnant women are more vulnerable to COVID-19 because pregnancy changes the immune system. Those who are older, overweight, and have pre-existing medical conditions such as hypertension and diabetes have an increased risk of developing severe COVID-19.

"Pregnant women should discuss this with their doctor as this is a complicated decision that needs to take into account individual circumstances," Prof Cheng said.

Some women did fall pregnant during the Pfizer trial, both in the control group who got the vaccine and in the placebo group.

"These vaccine trials excluded people who were pregnant, but when you study tens of thousands of people, some will get pregnant and there were about two dozen cases in the Pfizer trial. There were two cases of miscarriage during those trials but in both cases it was in the placebo group (did not get the vaccine)," Prof Offit said.

HOW LONG WILL THE VACCINE PROTECT ME?

It's too early to say how long the COVID-19 vaccines will last. All the research so far shows the vaccines protect against disease, hospitalisation and death, but for how long is still to be determined.

Prof Cheng said if the vaccines are as good as natural infection "it could be quite a long time".

"We've had this infection around for a year and we have not heard of too many reinfections and we are not seeing reinfection with these new variants," Prof Cheng said.

"How long does the immune system remain activated to protect you against infection and might another strain come along where the protection you have doesn't work against that strain? I'd say it lasts a year at least, but at this stage, it might be more." The influenza vaccine changes every year because influenza mutates quickly and we don't know if COVID-19 will do the same.

WHY HAS AUSTRALIA BEEN SLOW TO ROLL OUT VACCINES, BEHIND THE UK AND US? Australia was slower than other countries to sign contracts to buy doses of COVID-19 vaccines. This placed us further behind other countries in the vaccine supply queue. Some of the vaccines we invested in - the Queensland University vaccine - fell over. We are producing the AstraZeneca vaccine in Australia and it took time to reconfigure the manufacturing plant to do this. Our medical regulator was also slower to approve vaccines for use. It decided against approving the vaccines for emergency use because we had low case numbers and instead conducted a lengthy, full approval process.

"Other countries who are rolling out vaccine programs (faster) have generally used emergency-use authorisations," Prof Cheng said.

HOW IS THE SAFETY DATA LOOKING FROM OVERSEAS?

Close to 200 million doses have so far been administered and governments around the world are monitoring side effects.

"Right now, there is no clear safety signal problem. Right now, nothing has really emerged," Prof Offit said. "The problem with giving a vaccine to millions of people is the coronavirus vaccines are designed to prevent coronavirus infection, not everything else that happens in life," Prof Offit said. "US basketballer Hank Aaron passed away from a stroke two weeks after he got a vaccine. He had a stroke and died, and people are trying to make something of that but he was 86. Thank God, for now, there does not seem to be a safety issue and if there is one, we will know it," Prof Offit said.

CAN THE VACCINE CAUSE TRANSVERSE MYELITIS?

Transverse myelitis is a spinal inflammation and three participants in the AstraZeneca trial developed it. The incidence of transverse myelitis is one to four cases per million people and is associated with both viral and bacterial infections including herpes simplex, chickenpox, and syphilis. It is also associated with multiple sclerosis.

"There were two cases of transverse myelitis in the AstraZeneca vaccine arm and one in the control arm (who did not receive the COVID-19 vaccine). One of those who developed transverse myelitis who received the AstraZeneca vaccine had pre-existing condition multiple sclerosis which is one of the causes of transverse myelitis. One case of transverse myelitis was in the control arm not receiving the COVID-19 vaccine which suggests that there is an existing background rate of transverse myelitis that can happen at any time," Prof Cheng said.

WILL THE VACCINES CAUSE HERD IMMUNITY?

If the vaccines do end up preventing transmission, when enough of the population is immunised, it will create herd immunity, meaning there will be enough immunity in the population so that those individuals who are not immunised will end up being protected because the virus won't be circulating.

"That level has to be is probably two out of three people need to be immune before you see herd immunity," Prof Nolan said.

CAN THE MRNA VACCINES CHANGE YOUR DNA?

Another rumour is that the Pfizer mRNA vaccines can change your DNA but the vaccine simply gives the cells in the body the recipe to make the spike protein which will prime the immune system. It is biologically impossible to change your DNA. "The mRNA vaccines have nothing to do with DNA, the DNA makes RNA and that RNA goes into the cell's cytoplasm which is the part of the cell that makes protein. It has nothing to do with DNA," Prof Nolan said.

IS THE VACCINE LINKED TO BELL'S PALSY? Four people out of 44,000 in the Pfizer vaccine trial developed Bell's palsy. The condition occurs in the general population each year at a rate between one to four cases per 10,000 people, but with millions of doses now administered, new data is showing there is no higher risk. "In the US we've administered over 40 million doses, and pre-licensure there was a concern in the Pfizer trial that Bell's palsy was occurring at a greater rate than placebo group. But now that tens of millions of doses are out there, the latest data shows the incidence of Bell's palsy is not greater in the vaccinated group, compared to unvaccinated group," Prof Paul Offit said.
---
Bledisloe rethink

A TRIPLE-header Bledisloe Cup series in December is among the revolutionary ideas being modelled by rugby officials dealing with the COVID-19 crisis.

While Rugby Australia is focused on the return to Super Rugby or a domestic tournament from July, officials at the Melbourne Rebels devised a three-tiered model dealing with local and foreign border restrictions for the rest of 2020.

Given the radically increasing rates of coronavirus in South Africa, it seems unlikely Super Rugby will resume in July, if at all this year.

The third proposal designed by Rebels officials in their spreadsheet, obtained by The Daily Telegraph, is the possibility of playing only New Zealand at the end of the year.

The idea would be to play the three-Test series against the All Blacks over three successive weekends, on December 5, 12 and 19. It would be preceded by the five-team domestic competition involving the four Super franchises and Western Force, followed by the Possibles vs Probables Wallabies audition, and a potential State of Origin game.

There are also discussions around staging an All Stars rugby match similar to the NRL's for compelling content to satisfy broadcast demand and re-engage fans.

The triple-header Bledisloe idea is a hugely appealing prospect as speculation increases that the borders of Australia and New Zealand will be closed for an extended period, likely curtailing the scheduled opening two games in August.

One figure suggested that even if restrictions remained in place in December, the governments of either nation could make an exception for the rugby teams, have them fly on a chartered plane and be placed in quarantine for 14 days before playing out the series and sharing the much-needed revenue.

RA is hoping it can stage any form of rugby in July due to its dire financial situation in which all of its reserves could be spent and there is no broadcast deal for next year.

The news comes as there was tentative movement on the pay-cut negotiations between RA and RUPA.After assessing the financial documents given to them on Sunday, RUPA responded to RA yesterday, seeking clarity on some issues while suggesting the players would be open to taking a cut between the executive team, which accepted a 30 per cent cut last week, and chief executive Raelene Castle, who has taken a 50 per cent hit.
---
ACADEMIC research into the origins of coronavirus will have to be vetted by government officials before it can be published, according to a disturbing report from China.

Two Chinese universities posted government directives stipulating all research into the origins of the virus were to be vetted by authorities.

The online posts by Fudan University in Shanghai and China University of Geoscience in Wuhan were deleted after CNN made inquiries. Cached versions of the documents remain online.

The directives mandate that papers on the origin of COVID-19 be "strictly and tightly managed", involving oversight from the university administration and a task force of the State Council, according to CNN.

Professor Clive Hamilton (left), author of the book Silent Invasion: China's InfluenceIn Australia, said the directive follows earlier propaganda efforts by Beijing to "control the narrative" by promulgating "outlandish theories" about the origin of the virus. According to one of these stories, the virus was brought to China by US troops, while according to another the virus originated in Italy.

"It's very consistent with the news that we've been getting out of China for a couple of months now," he said.

"Chinese scientists have been publishing world-leading information on the virus, its nature and it origin, and they have been silenced and disciplined. Some have gone off the radar, so that has meant that the world is deprived of important information about COVID-19."The reported origin of COVID-19 in the live animal markets of Wuhan has proved a touchy issue for Beijing, with US President Donald Trump's repeated use of the term "Chinese virus" in press conferences prompting a telephone call from Chinese President Xi Jinping on March 26.
---
CHINA is using allegations of Australian war crimes to draw attention away from its -ruinous mishandling of COVID-19, among many other outrages.

Observe as China's Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying plays the distraction card over and over during a press conference on Monday night.

"The heinous crimes committed by some Aust-ralian soldiers in Afghanistan have been reported by the Australian media ..." True. That's because we have a free press.

According to China's dictatorship-commanded media, of course, China has never done anything wrong, ever, in the history of everything.

"The Australian side has been reacting so strongly to my colleague's tweet. "Why is that?" Because it's a revolting lie.

"Afghan lives matter!" We know. That's why Australian soldiers helped liberate Afghanistan from Taliban tyranny. Incidentally, only two nations maintained ties with the Taliban following 9/11: Pakistan and … China.

"The Australian government … owes the Afghan people a formal apology." They've already received apologies from the Prime Minister and the head of the Australian Defence Force.

Do try to keep up, dear.

"As a mature government, the Australian government should know the proper way to deal with this horrible matter." We do. Then again, we could try China's usual strategy and simply deny it. "This is about the discernment of right and wrong. We must uphold principles on things like this." We're actually being lectured on right and wrong by a dictatorship that harvests -organs from living people.

This is awesome.

"The root cause is that Australia violated the basic norms governing inter-national relations, and said and did the wrong things on issues related to Hong Kong and Xinjiang concerning China's core interests." Now we're getting somewhere. This isn't about -Afghanistan at all - it's about Chinese economic power. Next, the Foreign Ministry spokeswoman deals with the origin of COVID-19: "China has been open, transparent and respon-sible in origin tracing … our co-operation is steadily -advancing with close communication and exchange." News just in from CNN: "Vast trove of leaked documents shows China under-reported COVID-19 numbers, took weeks to diagnose new cases and didn't disclose a -December flu spike in Hubei." You were saying, Ms Hua?

"Previously, for many so-called Chinese human rights violations that do not exist, Australia … did not hesitate to come forward and make all kinds of accusations against China." It's easy to dodge accusations of human rights violations when you define certain people as non-human.

Speaking of whom, how are all those Uyghurs enjoying their "voluntary education and training" torture camps up north?

"China always speaks out loud and clear and upholds justice when it comes to -violations of human conscience and international fairness and justice." In related completely factual developments, pigs are winged creatures capable of flight, China doesn't execute more people than the rest of the world combined and Xi Jinping isn't a Winnie the Pooh cosplay enthusiast.

COMMUNIST STATE'S HISTORY OF BLOOD ■1949-1953 Mao's Land Reform Campaign - 1,000,000 to 4,700,000 estimated deaths ■1950-1953 Campaign to suppress counter- revolutionaries - 712,000 to 2,000,000 estimated deaths ■1957-1959 Anti-Rightist Campaign - 550,000+ deaths (estimated) ■1959 Tibetan uprising - 87,000 deaths (estimated) ■1958-1962 Great Leap Forward - 18 million+ deaths (estimated) ■1966-1976 Cultural Revolution - 1.5 to two million deaths ■1989 Tiananmen Square Uprising - 7000 to 10,000 deaths ■ 1950 - Onward suppression of Tibet - unknown deaths ■2010 - Onward suppression of Uyghurs - unknown deaths ■2020 - COVID-19 - 1,473,000 deaths and counting
---
Step up in the region or China will take over, intel boss warns THE former intelligence chief to the US Navy's -Pacific Fleet has called on the Australian government to "aggressively" reach out to our Pacific Island neighbours with aid packages to counter Chinese influence in the region.

Captain Jim Fanell (pictured) said failure to do so means it is "just a matter of time before the nations of the South Pacific begin to see PLA navy warships and air force military aircraft plying their waters and flying across their airways".

His warning comes as analysts indicate Kiribati's Christmas Island Pacific atoll 2000km south of -Hawaii could be the next target for China to try and build a military base.

Captain Fanell said the re-election of Kiribati president Taneti Maamau just months after he ditched support of Taiwan in favour of Beijing "is an indicator of the growing effectiveness of the PRC's strategic influencing campaign across the South Pacific".

"It seems likely that Beijing will provide Kiribati huge amounts of money that are contingent upon -allowing the People's Republic of China to have greater access and exclusionary rights in this tiny atoll nation," he said.

China is now the third largest supplier of cash in the region - behind Australia and New Zealand.

Australian money comes in the form of aid whereas China's largely comes in the form of loans for big infrastructure projects that are then built by Chinese -companies.

Chinese loans have been labelled debt-trap diplomacy and for some nations - such as Tonga - more than half the country's debt is owed to China.

It proved a trap for Sri Lanka two years ago when it was forced to hand China control of a Chinese built port on a 99-year lease to pay off a $14 billion debt.

"Over the past three years, scores of PRC government officials have been travelling Oceania to offer infrastructure deals and it now appears their work is beginning to pay off," Captain Fanell said.

In 2017 China released a paper called Vision for Maritime Cooperation under the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) which outlined its plan to expand influence into the Pacific through big civilian infrastructure programs.

Captain Fanell said the building of civilian ports, such as an 800m quay in Vanuatu, could be paving the way for the Chinese navy in the future. "Many questioned the necessity for such a large wharf given Vanuatu's economic circumstances, but from a military perspective it would appear that this dock would allow PLA navy warships a perfect harbour in the future," he said.

Jonathan Pryke, the Lowy Institute's Pacific Islands -expert, said the port on Kiribati's Christmas Island atoll "would be of clear strategic benefit to China".

Kiribati has a population of just 110,000 spread over 33 islands as part of an exclusive economic zone larger than India and a host of problems including non-communicative diseases and rising sea levels that would benefit from Chinese aid.

"Australia and its allies will need to be vigilant that this assistance doesn't come with some kind of concession to give China a strategic foothold," Mr Pryke said.

China has already tried to establish bases in the Pacific. Just days after the Solomon Islands ditched support for Taiwan in favour of Beijing last year, a Chinese company attempted to lease all of Tulagi Island with its perfect deepwater harbour. That was rejected as unlawful by the courts.

Captain Fannell warned a string of Chinese bases across the Pacific would -profoundly affect Australia's strategic and defence -thinking.

"The danger for Australia is that Beijing will use their new BRI partnerships to further manipulate the international order in its favour and thus empower it to take punitive actions against Australia if it does not kowtow to the Chinese Communist Party's demands," he said.

"Australia has just witnessed this over the issue of Prime Minister Morrison's legitimate inquiry into the origins of the coronavirus. The PRC not only refused to accept such a query, but went one step further and penalised Australia for even asking the question." Captain Fanell said Australia needed to "aggressively" reach out to Pacific nations to offer aid while at the same time talking to "Washington, Tokyo and Taipei to offer comprehensive solutions to these -nations problems." The first step should be to help Kiribati, in the heart of the world's largest tuna belt, to build a viable fishing -industry before China stepped in to do that instead.

A Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade spokesman said Australia was pumping a record $1.4 billion a year into the Pacific as part of Pacific Step-up, which had "pivoted our development assistance to prioritise what Pacific nations need most in the context of COVID-19.

"We welcome commitments from others that support sustainable development and respond to the priorities of our region," the spokesman said.

"The Australian Government looks forward to continuing to work closely with Kiribati President Taneti Maamau, following his -re-election." The Chinese consulate did not respond to requests for comment.

PAPUA NEW GUINEA

DEBT........91% GRANTS...$81.6m LOANS.....$593m FIJI DEBT........87% GRANTS...$57.1m LOANS.....$389m SAMOA DEBT........69% GRANTS...$58m LOANS.....$236m VANUATU DEBT........68% GRANTS...$103.4m LOANS.....$221m TONGA DEBT........67% GRANTS...$75.77m LOANS.....$154m COOK ISLANDS DEBT........20% GRANTS...$23.17m LOANS.....$5.5m

AVERAGE TOTAL DEBT .......76% GRANTS ..$505.6m LOANS.....$1.6B
---
TIME TO BUILD BUSHFIRE-SAFE FUTURE Linda Silmalis's report on the bushfires royal commission outlines sombre warnings and potential reforms among other highlights (Glimpse into hell, 31/10).

In the 2019-2020 bushfire season, fires destroyed 24 million hectares of land, many bush animals, 3000 houses and, sadly, 33 human lives.

It's trusted our federal, state, and territory leaders will introduce the recommendations of the royal commissioner.

These recommendations will help assist all those responsible for fire prevention, warnings, actions and rescue including ministers, commissioners, fire officers, volunteers, farmers, national parks and support agencies.

The importance of weather fire alerts, safety warnings and safety actions are paramount.

It's also important to be alert to fire lighting in danger zones, arsonists and fire carelessness.

The fair and quick distribution of donated public support money is also important.

Ron Brown, Ballina

Maybe it's time for UN to monitor US elections What an indictment of the American electoral system as its election result hangs on a knife edge despite Democrat Joe Biden leading the popular vote by four million (Joe says bye Don, 6/11).

The electoral college system is archaic and undemocratic. Its winner-takes-all set-up disregards millions of votes in states large and small, Republican or Democratic.

There is no independent control and management of the electoral process across the nation, allowing politicians to interfere with everything from the drawing of the district boundaries to the quantity and location of ballot collection boxes.

Voting is non-compulsory, with huge money and effort spent turning out the base or suppressing the other side's vote and each state sets its own election rules.

Perhaps next time the United Nations should send monitors to the US to ensure free and fair elections.

Han Yang, North Turramurra

Divided land needs a healer The question is not who has won the election in America, but who will be the healer of a nation so sadly divided in a spirit of hatred and fear (Joe says bye Don, 6/11)?

Like Jesus Christ once said, the most clear evidence of people being good is found in those who are peacemakers.

Can Australia join that healing or has the spirit of hate spread to here? So far, Scott Morrison and Anthony Albanese have been careful to stress that keeping and steadying the US alliance is their main goal.

Geoff Hinds, Merrylands

Trump legacy worth respect It now appears that, despite current dramas and court injunctions, Joe Biden's Democrats will be governing the US for the next four years (Joe says bye Don, 6/11).

Americans are on the verge of having elected a 78-year-old decent man with, unfortunately, signs of age-related decline and we can only wish him well.

It is well known that Donald Trump is a maverick-style president but, love him or hate him, he has achieved some excellent results.

Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, US unemployment was at its lowest for many years, there were more jobs available than before, the share market was good and business confidence high.

He started dialogue with North Korea and was responsible for several Arab nations signing agreements to rightfully acknowledge Israel as a separate state in the Middle East. No mean feat and one his predecessors could not achieve.

It is to be hoped his eventual concession speech contains some grace so he may be remembered with a form of respect for the job he did for his country.

Darryl Tutton, Wollstonecraft

Praise for health heroes In a victory for common sense, Australia's vaccination rates have hit a record high with figures revealing five-year-olds are 94.9 per cent fully vaccinated (Vax rate hits high despite fake fears, 1/11).

Programs such as No Jab, No Play and No Jab, No Pay have played a critical role. Apparently high-profile anti-vaxxers' ideas have failed to resonate with parents.

Everyone involved in promoting vaccination should take a bow. Peter Penglis, Kambah, ACT

An investment in future Referring to Vikki Campion's column on the importance of investing in childcare, there has never been a time in modern Australia when "don't breed them if you can't feed them" was good economic policy (Forget the kidults, give kidlings some dough - Vikki Campion, 31/10).

Our economy requires well-educated mature adults. Our birthrate is too low, we produce too few.

Experience shows we need to start investing in adults from a very young age and ensure they benefit from that early start.

Childcare is an opportunity for every "village" to assist parents in educating their kids, a major part of which is learning to interact with their peers.

Peter Egan, Artarmon

Remembering our heroes Your pride of Australia promotion (Thanks a million, 31/10) brought back memories of the terrible bushfires of last summer.

Having been evacuated to Malua Bay beach on December 31, my heroes would have to be our surf club lifesavers.

With literally thousands of evacuees descending upon our little surf club, they managed to register everybody, provide food (donated by locals), keep us informed and, best of all, managed to hand out hot drinks (coffee, etc).

And, all of this with no power, no mobile coverage and under constant threat from the firestorm that surrounded us.

Janice Russell, Malua Bay

Getting pickled at Christmas Thank you for your food feature in todays SMARTdaily section (Something to keep on the side, 6/11).

Every year (at this time) I start pickling (and bottling) vegetables. Pickled cucumbers are a Christmas gift to family and friends rather than the obligatory greetings card.

I recently went to the fruit and vegetable markets at Flemington where I purchased a 5kg box of Lebanese cucumbers. I then spent the weekend pickling and bottling.

I will be returning soon to purchase more fresh produce and to try the recipes in the SMART food column - especially the Sauerkraut - to accompany my slow-cooker corned beef.

Gloria Velleley, Belrose

Let fans call the tune The "it's a wake-up call" response to the Blues loss on Wednesday night is a bit tough (Freddy's dilemma: Is it stick or twist, 6/11).

I thought they played well considering the out-of-position, out- of-form selections they had to contend with.

I suggest that in future we should play the series at the end of the season and let the team be picked by the fans - at least we would be responsible for the angst.

Barrie Laurie, Tweed Heads Don't wine about Adelaide Your editorial commentary which claimed that "it is a well-known fact that nothing good ever happens in Adelaide" is a bit harsh (A home town turnaround, 6/11).

What about all the christenings, marriages and celebrations of lives well lived in "The City of Churches"?

To say nothing of all the wonderful wine.

Douglas Mackenzie, Deakin, ACT

State pride is on the line The State of Origin on Wednesday is not only a defining football match, but the pride of NSW is riding on the outcome. Please boys, keep the series alive. I can't stand the thought of a sardonic Queensland premier and her next crass text to our Gladys if her side wins. Go the Blues.

Marg Swindells, Castle Hill

HAVE YOUR SAYMAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
THEY are the NRL stars of the future and their skills were on show for all to see yesterday.

There was Sandon Smith from St Edward's College, the dangerous back who was named in the 2019 under 18s NSW State of Origin squad. And Farrer Memorial Agricultural High School's Mitchell Henderson, the crafty playmaker who won last year's Harold Matthews Cup with the Newcastle Knights. Both youngsters lit up Tamworth on Wednesday, at the opening match of this year's prestigious NRL Schoolboys Cup.

Spectators are banned from attending matches, but thousands were able to watch the match through The Daily and Sunday Telegraph, which has secured exclusive rights to stream the Schoolboy Cup. Henderson crashed over three times for his school, but it was Smith's last-minute intercept try that saw underdogs St Edward's eliminate Ferrer 18-16 and proceed to the next round.

For 44 years, the competition has uncovered Australia's best rugby league talent - from Greg Alexander and Peter Sterling to Johnathan Thurston and James Tedesco.

This year, despite the challenges of COVID-19, the tournament has survived and will be played as a 14-round knockout. Today, St Dominic's College will line up against Patrician Brothers Blacktown at Windsor Leagues Club.

Both schools have produced some of the hottest rugby league talent in the country.

St Dominic's alumni include Nathan Cleary and Brad Fittler while Matt Lodge, Dallin Watene-Zelezniak and Stephen Crichton are PBB old boys.

St Dominics will field a young side with many players currently affiliated with the Penrith Panthers.

Jakob Arthur, the son of Parramatta Eels coach Brad Arthur, will steer the ship for PBB.

SUBSCRIBER EXCLUSIVE Patrician Brothers' Blacktown v St Dominic's College Watch live from 12.30pm with commentary, replays and halftime highlights.

Log on at match time today dailytelegraph.com.au
---
SAINT AJINKYA Rahane for restoring a nation's pride. Thrown into the fire when he was appointed to replace dad-to-be Virat Kohli as India captain in the wake of the nation's worst defeat, Rahane redeemed his country with a stunning eight-wicket win over Australia. Piling on the runs with the bat, Rahane was also impeccable with his field placements and decision-making.

SINNER THE NRL for giving Brent Naden a one-month backdated ban for testing positive to an illicit drug. Found guilty of using cocaine in the aftermath of the Panthers' grand final loss to Melbourne, the backdated ban means Naden will not miss a day of pre-season training. He has effectively escaped punishment in a move that sends a poor message to generation next.

SHOOSH WHICH highprofile NRL back is rated as a 50/50 chance to rejoin his club for the remainder of the pre-season? The former Origin player has been struggling to deal with a number of personal matters.

SPOTTED BEAU Ryan enjoying five-star digs at Gerringong in a cliffside mansion known as the "Bunker House". Built by his mate Neil Hipwell of Instagramfamous building company Future Flip, Ryan was one of several Range Rover-driving guests to visit the fast-becoming-famous south coast house over the festive break. Wallabies legend John Eales was spotted a stone's throw away in Gerroa playing tennis with Aussie popstar Guy Sebastian.

SPOTTED BULLDOGS recruit Luke Thompson getting his first real taste of the Aussie summer on a beach break in Port Stephens. We are hoping some of his Dogs teammates tipped the English enforcer up about wearing sunscreen. Thompson has shrugged off the homesickness of late last year after being reunited with his long-term partner. We are hearing he is in a good place and ready to deliver on his much-hyped potential.

SPOTTED RYAN Walkinshaw was also getting his first Oz tan, with the English owner of Walkinshaw Andretti United unable to spend the festive season with his UK-based family because of COVID-19. He's been stuck in Australia since February and is fast losing his English accent. Aside from running one of Supercars' best teams, Walkinshaw has also added caravan company New Age Caravans to a business stable that also includes the iconic HSV.

SPOTTED KEEPING the English theme going, a bevy of Pommies were spotted at Ricky Stuart's Canberra home on Christmas Day. Known to be a father-like figure as well as a coach, Stuart invited all the English Canberra players to his home for a Christmas Day feast. We would hate to be paying the food bill given the size of the guests, which included giant backrower Elliott Whitehead.
---
A torn calf tendon - and not his widely reported knee issue - is what forced Andrew Fifita to wait three months before returning to the NRL last week.

Claiming his knee is as good as it's "ever been" and that medical retirement hadn't been considered, the ex-NSW Origin prop instead told how he had deliberately bulked-up to 124kg - as he plans to play less minutes, but with a higher rate of force and power.

"My knee is actually really good at the moment - probably the best it's ever been. I'm squatting 270, close to 300 kilos. It was just about getting that calf right (before I could play again)," Fifita said yesterday.

The senior Sharks forward underwent a knee arthroscope and stem cell surgery at the end of last year, which given his limited pre-season forced his withdrawal from the NRL and Indigenous All Stars match in February.

He recovered to feature in Cronulla's first two rounds (Souths and Melbourne) before the COVID-19 premiership shutdown .

Fifita played his first match in three months last week against St George Illawarra, explaining his season was dented less than 24-hours after returning to training in early May.

"I trained all over the break, I felt as fit as ever. And then when I came back in on the first day on the field, I tore my calf," Fifita said.

"It was the worst feeling.

"During the break, I really knuckled down ... to be the fittest I could be. I installed a home gym and really took it upon myself - and to have that (torn calf) happen, it was the toughest thing.

"The first two rounds I was playing at 119kg - which I felt was way too light for my liking. So I wanted to go up and put the right muscle in the right places, especially a lot more muscle in my legs, so that was the main focus over the (COVID-19) break.

"I feel really comfortable with where I'm at.

"The best thing for our team with the limited minutes I'm getting, I can afford to put on those extra kilos.

"If I was playing my usual 65-70 minutes, I'd probably drop a few kilos, but at the moment I feel comfortable." Fifita played 43 minutes against the Dragons, producing 12 carries for 107m. "It was a risk to play on the weekend with my calf, but it's kind of tough at the moment with the Sharkies and I really needed to get out there and help my club," Fifita said. "I think there's a lot of outside noise when it comes to me personally, but at the moment, my body is doing really well."
---
FORMER SURF STAR AND KNIGHTS TRAGIC MATT HOY CAN'T WAIT TO WATCH SON TEX DEBUT FOR THE CLUB, WRITES NICK WALSHAW NOBODY is willing rugby league back quite like Matt Hoy. Which is some claim, right? Especially now, only hours away from the most hyped of NRL relaunches.

It's a stunning Aussie sports resurrection which, apart from finally allowing Peter V'landys to sleep again, will revive jobs, rivers of money, Super Saturday and, importantly for some, bring an end to footballers choreographing Tic Toc videos.

But for Hoyo, it means something more again.

Greater, even, than a Bells Beach title for this famed Newcastle surfer who also loves his footy as much as you'd expect a fella who not only won eight straight premierships as a kid, but counts Andrew Johns and Danny Buderus among his mates.

A Knights fanatic, you might say, right down to that club emblem inked on his left ankle.

Indeed, remember in 2000, when the Knights famously lost that preliminary final against the Roosters after leading 16-2 at the break?

Well, Hoyo still has the No.7 jersey Joey threw away afterwards. "Wear it to every game too," he laughs.

"I'm not even sure if it really is the jumper Joey tossed away that night, but I've been told it is and I'm going with it." Which is why Hoyo is like so many footy fans right now.

Together, all of us having counted down the months, weeks, days and now - gasp - hours until we can again cheer James Tedesco in space, Josh Papalii in traffic, Origin, Tommy Turbo, the Fergy Ferg backflip, the Benji Step, Cronulla Mermaids, the Viking Clap, Golden point and, eventually, Leichhardt Oval hot dogs.

For some, a resurrected NRL means South Sydney's Latrell Mitchell under that first high ball - and every one thereafter.

While for others, it will be the story that is Valentine Holmes in Townsville, Nathan Cleary at Penrith or whatever can still be squeezed from Canterbury playmaker Kieran Foran.

Elsewhere, you have the Roosters chasing a threepeat from 12th, the Warriors looking to prove themselves to be more than the team that saved a code, while Parramatta need only to break a title drought stretching 34 years.

Truly, the reasons for wanting rugby league back are everywhere. But Hoyo?

He just wants to see his boy play.

Which by our reckoning, makes his the greatest of them all.

And why sometime in the next 48 hours, NRL types should test this proud dad for COVID-19, clear him, then provide special access to Campbelltown Stadium so that on Sunday afternoon he can watch son Tex make his top-grade debut against Penrith in the Newcastle No.1 jersey.

Certainly, the old boy has waited long enough.

"Oh, it's the longest lead-up to a debut ever," Hoy agrees.

"Most young blokes get told on Tuesday they'll be debuting that weekend. It's nice and quick.

"But with Tex, I think we've known for about eight or nine weeks now. As soon as Kalyn Ponga got suspended we knew, basically.

"Which would have to make it an NRL record for waiting, I reckon." Better, it's nothing like the story dad, or anyone else, expected. Especially when you learn that while Tex may be the son of an Aussie surf favourite, you could count on one hand the number of times this 20-year-old has actually ridden a stick.

"First time I took Tex surfing, he was eight," the old man recalls. "Got straight up too, riding a couple of waves for 100m.

"But then afterwards, he looked at me and said 'dad, is that it?'. "I said 'ah, mate, yeah it is'.

"So that was the finish of it ... Tex said he wasn't surfing again." Which must've hurt a little, right?

"Ah, a little, yeah," Hoy says.

"When I was young, my old man always took me surfing, which I thought was amazing.

"But there's no point trying to set your kids on a path.

"You have to let them go do what they want.

"And the way Tex is doing that, I couldn't be prouder." Of course, while yet to play an NRL game, the story of Tex Hoy is already well told.

Most of League Land is well aware of this livewire Knights prodigy who, after signing on with the club aged 14, starred at this year's NRL Nines and now lives with Connor Watson and Kalyn Ponga - the latter of whom he will replace in the backline against Penrith.

Able to play fullback or five-eighth, Hoy not only has the competitive instincts of his old man, and the calmness one learns from being raised among Green Room Gods, but the skills that come with private tutorials from a future Immortal.

Can you imagine it?

Weekends, playing footy in the backyard while being tipped up by Joey, Bedsey and some of the other greatest leaguies who ever lived.

At which point, though, we should also mention Hoy Sr played eight years of junior league - winning eight straight premierships.

"Although, we had Adam Muir for a lot of those years," he laughs in reference to the retired NSW and Australian forward. "So I certainly wasn't the shining light." But still, you'll be claiming Tex as a chip off the 'ol block, right? "Well, he's about to make his first grade debut," Hoy says. "So of course I'm going to say that.

"And I can claim it, can't I?

"I know people always think, being a surfer, I was laid-back. "And while I was no athlete, I've always been as competitive as the next person." Which is why on the eve of this NRL resurrection, no yarn about rugby league returning tops this proud dad who will finally get to see the son he loves represent the club he loves in the game he loves.

In short, bloody fantastic.

"Although the story has nothing to do with me," Hoy insists. "Everything Tex has, he's earnt himself.

"Thankfully, he doesn't take after me, either. Tex takes after his mum, who is mellow and happy being a homebody.

"So he's always been a good kid, never got in any trouble ." OK, but what about that whisper suggesting he once broke your hand in a backyard game of footy?

"That's a Matty Johns story," Hoy laughs.

So your suggesting a 10 per cent GST has been added?

"Absolutely a GST has been thrown on there," the old man says. "There was no broken hand.

"Although Tex probably did jam me in a tackle. That part would be correct." If the NRL offers no special clearance for the Hoy family this Sunday, dad says he will be watching on from the lounge room at home, can of VB in hand.

"Can't wait, either," he says. "For Tex to play NRL, it's great. "And to also be debuting for the family's hometown team, the club we all support, I'm so stoked for him. "Or at least I will be … when he finally gets out there."
---
CHINA CASHING IN ON VIRUS: ENVOY

THE Chinese government has created a global pandemic through their "gross negligence, obsessive secrecy and brazen dishonesty" and is now using it to advance their interest in our region, the United States Ambassador to Australia says.

Condemning China over its culpability in the spread of COVID-19, Ambassador Arthur B. Culvahouse described China's communist regime as "bullies" who were trying to destabilise our region with a "shocking new vigour" while the rest of the world dealt with the health and economic consequences of the coronavirus.

Mr Culvahouse, nominated US Ambassador to Australia by United States President Donald Trump in late 2018, said that China was taking full advantage of the pandemic to assert itself in a fashion typical of the -Chinese Communist Party "playbook".

"What Foreign Minister Marise Payne rightly referred to as destabilising activities are hardly new tactics from the CCP playbook, but they are being pursued with shocking new vigour as the rest of the world is focused on combating the COVID-19 pandemic, one which the CCP - through gross negligence, obsessive secrecy, and brazen dishonesty - first covered up while exporting it to the world," he said.

"Sadly, in this playbook creating a global pandemic is treated as one more opportunity to advance geo-strategic objectives." Mr Culvahouse made the remarks in an article he wrote on the "unbreakable" Australia and United States alliance, published on a government and defence website Defence Connect.

His comments follow Foreign Minister Marise Payne's criticism of China for reportedly sinking a Vietnamese fishing boat and stepping up other "destabilising activities" in the South China Sea.

In his opinion piece, Mr Culvahouse asserts that the "unbreakable alliance" between the US and Australia is essential while the CCP has "aggressively deployed its navy, coast guard and maritime militia across the South China Sea, seeking to advance a spurious claim of sole proprietorship over this massive international waterway".

"Having only recently sunk a Vietnamese fishing boat and locked naval weapon systems on a Philippine ship, it is even now in the midst of another outrageous confrontation over oil and gas rights within Malaysia's exclusive economic zone." Mr Culvahouse described the manoeuvres as "Beijing's heavy-handed attempts to unlawfully impose its territorial claims on the rest of the region".

"To counter this, three US Navy warships were joined by Australia's HMAS Parramatta for a series of important bilateral exercises in the South China Sea," he said.

"This activity was an important demonstration that the US and Australia will continue to stand strong together for our timeless values and mutually beneficial interests." While China continued to take advantage of the coronavirus pandemic, Mr Culvahouse said he did not believe the "bullies" would win.

"This is why I believe we will ultimately prevail, because bullies don't have partners, and they certainly don't have friends who come close to matching the durable, comprehensive, and integrated quality of the Unbreakable Alliance between the United States and Australia," he said.

"For the sake of all who value open commerce and the rule of law, we shall not go gentle into that good night." The United States has supported Australia's call for an independent inquiry into the origins and outbreak of COVID-19 by China, with the resolution on it going to the World Health Assembly on Monday where a consensus will be sought on the matter.

China has relentlessly attacked Australia for proposing an inquiry, with its Ambassador in Canberra last month threatening a boycott of Australian trade.

US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo has criticised China's economic retaliation against Australia following the call for an inquiry.

"Who in the world wouldn't want an investigation of how this happened to the world? We would urge every country, all of our partners, to demand that we get answers for what happened here, but also that we continue to have - we get the transparency, that the world gets the transparency it needs," Mr Pompeo said last month.

Mr Culvahouse, who has been in Australia for just over a year, serves as the President's personal representative to the government and people of Australia.In the piece, he writes that Australia and the United States share the same view of the world and values.
---
Huge boost for NRL fans

A BIOSECURITY expert charged with resurrecting the NRL season has revealed he expects crowds to be back to rugby league in time for both the grand final and State of Origin series.

In a huge boost for footy fans, Associate Professor David Heslop (pictured) has told The Daily Telegraph he expects "mass gathering" crowds to be allowed back into stadiums by the end of this year.

An expert in analysing biosecurity risks and epidemic modelling, Heslop suggested that while the NRL would initially play to empty stadiums from May 28, a "graded" return to filling venues was the most likely course of action.

Internationally, there have been suggestions crowds may not return to some sports until 2021 at the earliest. However Heslop suggested that was only likely in the NRL if there was a change in Australia's current COVID-19 situation - such as a sudden new spike in cases.

The news comes as Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk launches an audacious bid to steal not only the NRL grand final on October 25, but two games from the ensuing November Origin series.

Asked when he again expected NRL crowds of 20,000 and above, Heslop said: "Based on current pathways, and barring any changes in the meantime, this would likely be sometime in the second half of this year." The positive prediction will almost certainly have major implications on where the NRL stages its showpiece games at the end of 2020.

While the Sydney Cricket Ground was initially chosen to host the NRL decider on October 4, it would be ruled out of the new, later timeslot should the T20 World Cup go ahead as scheduled.

With ANZ Stadium and Allianz Stadium also undergoing major renovations, the Queensland government is now pitching Suncorp Stadium as a potential venue for both the NRL decider and at least two Origin fixtures.

"It's certain that restrictions on mass gatherings of that size will be one of the last to be lifted," Heslop said. "It is also difficult to predict the timing with any certainty.

"(However) it's my expectation that once all active cases of COVID-19 in the community are fully identified and contact traced, or better still eliminated, then the respective state and territory governments and federal agencies will be able to think about easing mass gathering restrictions." October is also now shaping as a huge one for sports fans, with NRL and AFL deciders headlining a month that could also host Sydney's Spring Carnival, the T20 World Cup cricket tournament and Bathurst 1000.

The prospect of those major events being played in front of spectators shapes as a boost worth millions of dollars to sports chiefs and the economy.

Heslop said that while the NRL would initially return inside empty stadiums, there could be a chance for crowds to return gradually, with social- distancing measures employed inside venues like Bankwest Stadium."A graded and cautious approach to easing mass gathering restrictions by authorities is the most likely course of action," he said. "Beyond complying with the mandatory mass gathering restrictions in force, venues are able to employ other methods to ensure appropriate social distancing."
---
PETER V'landys has confirmed it could be just 42 days before the NRL is back as the Project Apollo team get ready to deliver a rugby league miracle on May 21.

And in another stunning development ahead of today's crucial Project Apollo meeting, The Daily Telegraph understands that the NRL is leaning towards a 15 round competition where every team plays each other once - as opposed to the two conference option. This would include having State of Origin played in the middle stage of the season.

As revealed exclusively in yesterday's Daily Telegraph, there is an increasingly likelihood that all Sydney-based players will be allowed to live in their homes and not in a bubble-type environment.

This would also be the case for the Canberra Raiders and Newcastle Knights players if teams are not forced into lockdown. Raiders star Josh Hodgson said players "have a duty" to get back on the field quickly.

"This is for everyone, not just us footy players but the community," said Hodgson, who only moved into a new house on Tuesday.

And while border restrictions most likely will force teams outside NSW and Canberra to relocate in Sydney for an expected period of two weeks, it is hoped they also can return to their home bases after that and travel by chartered flights on game day.

This is all due to the continued CONTINUED PAGE 88 FROM BACK PAGE drop in COVID-19 percentages in NSW with the daily increase in cases now 1.79 per cent compared to 22.27 per cent when the competition was suspended after round two.

It was initially thought the NRL would be lucky to return as early as July but that was then brought forward to May 28. Now it is likely to kick off another week earlier.

"I am optimistic (the season could be back playing on May 21)," V'landys said. "The committee is considering that (today) and I don't want to pre-empt any of their recommendations, but that is a possibility, yes." V'landys would not speculate on what the competition draw would be, although the 15-round draw was now the preferred option ahead of the two conference system.

"I will be happy with whatever recommendation they come up with," V'landys said. "The most important thing for me is restarting the season.

"We want to get everyone's spirits back up. You have to -inspire people." NSW deputy premier John Barilaro said he would work with the NRL to get it restarted. "I think the NRL is the tonic that we need to get through this crisis," Barilaro told Nine News last night.

Following a morning meeting of the Project Apollo team, it is expected a recommendation will be put to the Commission and that will be followed by a club hook-up.

The NRL has also been in high level talks with government officials who are expected to clear a path for the New Zealand Warriors to relocate to Australia. While the Warriors will have to go into self-isolation for two weeks as part of the strict Australian border controls, they will be allowed to train together as a team.The NRL is hoping that all Australian teams will be -allowed to return to their home bases by mid to late June and travel to games on -chartered flights.
---
A WORLD Health Organisation investigation into the origins of COVID-19 - first detected in the Chinese city of Wuhan more than a year ago - has failed to get off the ground with the UN body complaining that Beijing was blocking its team from entering the country.

The WHO announced that after months of preparation, its experts had begun travelling to China - only to be told that there were problems with their visas. "I am very disappointed with this news, given that two members had already begun their journeys," said WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus in a rare castigation of Beijing.

A 10-strong team was due to arrive in China this week after months of painstaking negotiations.

Beijing is determined to control the origin story of the virus, which has killed more than 1.8 million people so far.

The first cases of the coronavirus were recorded in the central Chinese city of Wuhan in late 2019, prompting accusations of chaotic, secretive handling by Chinese authorities which led to its spread beyond China.

But Beijing has so far resisted pressure for a full independent probe into the early days of the outbreak. Instead, it has seeded doubt as to whether the pandemic even started inside its borders at all.

The WHO mission was billed as a way to cut through the rancour and seek clear answers on how the virus jumped from animals to humans. But with some of the team already in transit, Beijing had yet to grant them entry, the WHO chief confirmed.
---
IF you can play in a grand final while nursing a punctured lung then taking on some wild surf at Bronte Beach is child's play.

Rugby league's eighth Immortal, Andrew Johns, was the lone surfer prepared to hit the waves as huge swells pounded the beach yesterday.

Johns might have drawn on some expert knowledge to take on the rough stuff - he is good mates with surfing legends Matt Hoy and Mick Fanning.

Johns famously helped Newcastle win their maiden premiership in 1997 after sustaining broken ribs and a punctured lung a fortnight earlier. A keen surfer since retiring from league, Johns helped out coaching the Parramatta halves this season while also carrying out his commentary duties with Channel 9. Unlike previous years, Johns will not be an official member of the NSW Blues coaching staff this season because of COVID-19 restrictions. But he will still play a role in the State of Origin series. Johns is close to NSW coach Brad Fittler and Blues assistant Danny Buderus, the three often talking footy.
---
KFC SuperCoach returns next Thursday and in case you've been living under a rock, we get FIVE trades for the upcoming round to allow for corona shenanigans.

Needless to say, the "T" button has copped a hammering for Sangster's Paradise. These are my five changes - subject to serious changes and DCE-style backflips. 1 David Fifita ($501,900) to " David Klemmer ($617,400), via Liam Knight The Broncos rolled the dice early in the COVID-19 break and sent Fifita for knee surgery. The gamble didn't pay off with the NRL to return much sooner than expected, meaning Fifita "will probably miss a few weeks", according to coach Anthony Seibold. Owned by over 50 per cent of KFC SuperCoaches, Fifita is the most sold player for Round 3. With the total trades staying at 37 despite reduced rounds, there is simply no point in stashing him.

With Jason Taumalolo a Sangster's Paradise stalwart, Klemmer is the obvious replacement after pumping out 69 and 72 in the opening weeks mostly in pure base, although he has also developed an offload. With Origin on after the season proper the value of Origin players is at an all-time high.

2 Nathan Cleary ($631,500) to"Connor Watson ($506,700) Cleary's TikTok drama has me TickedOff. The star Panther was my star POD for the season start and delivered big time by scoring second most points of anyone in the opening fortnight. However, Cleary is suspended for the next two rounds. Usually he'd be a definite hold, but the newly-introduced post-COVID rules mean 2020 has become a trade-a-holic's dream and Cleary must go (KFC SuperCoach Gods have retained 37 trades despite the five-round reduction and there is no Origin or byes to deal with).

What's more, there is a serious replacement on offer in Watson, who looms as a POD of the year at just two per cent ownership. The Newcastle utility is off the bench as he has the hooker spot to himself after the season-ending injury to Jayden Brailey (ACL). Watson played seven matches at No.9 ast year for scores of 91, 70, 55, 75, 82, 117 and 24 for an average of 73.5PPG. That's keeper territory, yet he's priced at a huge discount after averaging just 46 minutes last season.

3Jack Williams ($397,200) to"Eliesa Katoa ($171,900) Williams came into the season with plenty of hype after fighting off a number of contenders to claim Paul Gallen's No.13 jersey. The prediction of more game time was spot on with Williams averaging 54 minutes - up from 37 last year. But the time warp has come at the expense of work rate, with his PPM dropping from a beastly 1.14 to 0.64.

He is replaced by Warriors young gun Katoa - the most popular cheapie for the restart round. The injuries keep coming at the Warriors and the rookie is the big beneficiary. With Josh Curran, Agnatius Paasi and Jazz Tevaga out over the first two rounds, Katoa stunned by averaging 59 minutes and was arguably the Warriors' best forward.

However, his KFC SuperCoach stocks dipped when Paasi, Tevaga and Curran all made the plane over to Oz, seemingly relegating Katoa to a bench spot. Or so we thought. Barely a week into training and Tevaga and Leeson Ahn Mau both went down long term, all but assuring Katoa big minutes.

4 Kallum Watkins ($271,800) to"Isaah Yeo ($404,800) A forced change. England and Titans centre Kallum Watkins was set for a few handy price rises but is now a must-sell after quitting the NRL and heading back to the UK to support his father, who contracted coronavirus.

Playing 80 minutes at backrow but available at CTW, Yeo shows signs of being a John Bateman, Tohu Harris, Simon Mannering-style keeper, pumping out enormous base stats in a position known for inconsistency. He is the third most purchased player for Round 3 and for good reason.

5 Braidon Burns ($454,400) to Kotoni Staggs ($447,700) At the start of the season I had a 50-50 call between Burns and Staggs. Of course I opted for Burns, who currently sits 255 of 282 KFC SuperCoach players, while Staggs has the most points of any player. The four tries and three linebreaks have certainly helped, but more impressive for KFC SuperCoach is the nine tackle busts. Staggs is currently the most popular buy for Round 3, attracting double the interest of the next player Koroisau.
---
THE COVID FILES CORONAVIRUS cases across the world could have been cut by 95 per cent if China had come clean when it first learned the disease was infectious, according to damning new research.

As international fury builds at the Chinese Communist Party's handling of the pandemic and legal challenges mount against the regime, an investigation by The Daily Telegraph shows the true impact of the cover-up.

More than 1000 Australians have now joined a global class action suing China and the lawyer leading it said yesterday Beijing's whitewash will be central to the suit, which is seeking more than $A10 trillion.

"Had they acted immediately, it would have changed the entire spectrum of the world population being affected by this," said Jeremy Alters, head strategist at Berman Law Group. "It's at least 95 per cent, because had they closed the city when they first learned about the human to human transmission … it would have bought the world somewhere between six and eight extra weeks before it ever got here.

"Six to eight extra weeks in the lifetime in which we've been living for the last three or four months is an eternity." Research by Britain's University of Southampton, to be published in the science magazine Nature in coming days, shows the spread would have been dramatically reduced if containment measures were in place before Wuhan and three other cities shut down on January 23.

Had containment strategies been implemented at the start of January, when China first hid the fact that the virus was contagious, the researchers found the spread could have been reduced by 95 per cent.

Doctors at two hospitals in Wuhan separately reported to the Chinese CDC on December 27 and 29 that the then-unnamed virus was contagious, but it wasn't until January 20, after weeks of trying to suppress the information, that the Chinese government announced this finding.

If the measures "could have been conducted one week, two weeks, or three weeks earlier in China, cases could have been reduced by 66 per cent, 86 per cent, and 95 per cent, respectively, -together with significantly -reducing the number of affected areas", says the research, which accords with several other studies.

But lead researcher Professor Andy Tatem noted the study also showed that had China delayed its January 23 quarantine for another month the outbreak would have been "about 70 times bigger than actually happened".

With the global COVID-19 infection toll approaching three million yesterday there were increasing calls to hold China accountable.

US President Donald Trump and Prime Minister Scott Morrison are among leaders demanding a probe into the pandemic origins.

US intelligence officials are investigating whether the new coronavirus came from a high-security Wuhan lab or was naturally transmitted from bats to humans.

Although conspiracists argue the virus was man-made, most scientists concur that it was biological in nature.

But this doesn't preclude the possibility the virus was being tested at the lab and -accidentally escaped.

China has repeatedly blocked efforts to investigate the virus, from disinfecting the Wuhan seafood market characterised as the inception point before any swabs could be taken, to arresting whistleblowers who tried to warn the world about what was coming.

Beijing has also orchestrated a misinformation campaign that at times has accused the US military of introducing the virus.

According to a new report by the European Union's External Action Service, China and Russia have -"targeted conspiracy narratives" to shift the blame for the outbreak.

The EU yesterday denied it had bowed to Chinese pressure to water down the disinformation report.

It followed reports that said an early version of the report referred to China running "a global disinformation campaign to deflect blame for the outbreak of the pandemic and improve its international image".

A London-based Chinese diplomat this week said the world should "appreciate" the efforts of China rather than criticising its failings and called suggestions of an inquiry "politically motivated".

"We are fighting the virus at the moment, we are concentrating all our efforts on fighting against the virus," Chen Wen said. "Why talk about an investigation into this? This will divert not only attention, it will divert resources." Bondi local Daniel Rowntree (pictured above) is one of more than 5600 Australians who have recovered from coronavirus and, like many, wants answers as to how it started so it can't happen again. He supports calls for an -independent international review that considers how China's Communist Party leadership responded in the early days.

"I believe in a review process to see that the same mistakes are not repeated," Mr Rowntree said He believes the cases were so widespread in China the fact was that the "horse had already bolted" at the time COVID-19 was in the international spotlight. "By the time they realised it was a pandemic, it was too late."

Timeline of how China masked the impact of the coronavirus outbreak" NOV 17: "China's first case of COVID-19 reported, but not made public until March.

DEC 10:"Wei Guixian, a seafood merchant in Wuhan's Huanan wet-market, becomes sick.

DEC 20: A total of 60 cases of COVID-19 were recorded in China. DEC 27:" Wuhan doctor Zhang Jixian warns authorities of a new contagious disease affecting 180 patients.

DEC 26-30:" Multiple Chinese genomics companies are sent evidence of a new virus from the Wuhan patient data.

DEC 31:"Chinese officials alert the World Health Organisation's China office of an outbreak of pneumonia with an unknown cause in Wuhan. Internet authorities begin stripping posts from social media that include the terms "Wuhan unknown pneumonia," "SARS variation," "Wuhan seafood market".

JAN 1:"The health commission in China's Hubei province orders a genomics company to stop all testing and destroy samples of the new coronavirus.

Wuhan police bring in for questioning eight doctors who had warned about the new virus via social media in late December.

JAN 2:"The government-run Wuhan Institute of Virology identifies coronavirus and maps its genetic sequence but doesn't publicly announce the findings.

JAN 3:"The National Health Commission issues a gag order directing all virus samples be moved to designated state testing facilities or destroyed. Institutions are also ordered to not publish any research or information about the disease.

JAN 5: "Researchers in Shanghai map the coronavirus genome and hand the data to Beijing, urging that control measures be introduced.

JAN. 6:"China's CDC activates emergency response; not publicly announced. JAN 7:"President Xi Jinping takes charge of response; not publicly disclosed until February.

JAN 9: Chinese officials and the World Health Organisation announce a cluster of pneumonia cases in Wuhan.

JAN 10:"Chinese government expert Wang Guangfa describes the Wuhan pneumonia as "under control" and a "mild condition" on state television.

JAN 11:"Frustrated that their work to map the genome hasn't yet been released by the government, Shanghai researchers publicly release the sequence.

JAN 12:"Shanghai authorities close the lab for official "rectification". JAN 14:"The WHO announces for the first time there may be "limited" person-to-person transmission.

JAN 15:"Chinese CDC emergency centre Li Qun claims on state TV the risk of transmission is low.

JAN 18:"Tens of thousands of families in Wuhan turn out for a "potluck" banquet to celebrate Lunar New Year, encouraged by authorities to try to attempt to break a world record.

JAN 20:"As President Xi makes a first public statement about the outbreak, he avoids mentioning human-to-human transmission. It is left to government task force chief Zhong Nanshan to announce the same day that the virus is being spread person-to-person.JAN 23:"Chinese authorities finally lock down Wuhan, but not before allowing 5 million to flee the city without screening.
---
Beijing's rulers are determined to punish us for standing up for what's right, but here's how we could turn the tables, writes Daniel Walton

Australians don't generally pay close attention to foreign policy - until a foreign government places their job under threat. When that happens, they expect the Australian government to put aside diplomatic niceties and stand up for them.

When the Australian Workers' Union was formed in 1886, I suspect no one gathered mentioned trade with China. Fast forward to today and just about every one of the diverse industries the AWU covers is heavily influenced by our relationship with what's become the world's second largest economy. From our members in steel and aluminium who are exposed to the dumping of underpriced Chinese product, to our members in agriculture and mining who are exposed to the constant threat of arbitrary tariffs, China is the 800 pound gorilla in the room.

So when I urged the Prime Minister to hold his nerve and stand up to China's hostility on trade, I understood the skin our union members have in the game.

The Australian ethos of never backing down to bullies is important. Our coat of arms, after all, features two animals incapable of taking a backward step. But standing up to the Chinese government on trade isn't about posturing or looking tough. It's about protecting a rules-based trading system.

The Chinese Communist Party is currently punishing the industries in which AWU members work as payback for what they perceive as foreign policy rudeness - namely over our advocacy for an international investigation of coronavirus's origins in Wuhan.

Now some politicians and business leaders have argued that we shouldn't rock the economic boat. If we were to back down on our calls for the investigation, the argument goes, wouldn't that just be easier?

Perhaps. In the short term. But what about the precedent?

If we speak out about the grotesque human rights abuses against China's Uighur population, will Beijing whack tariffs on wool? If we ban Huawei from a telecommunications bid, will they stop buying our wine? If Mack Horton publicly calls out another doped-up Chinese swimmer, will they mark up Australian seafood?

Our trading relationship would become a point of leverage for the CCP. And that's when jobs will really be at risk. Australians can, and always should, back ourselves to compete on a level playing field.

So our national interest lies in defending that playing field. And national interest is what this is all about. We should reject the nonsense frame that this debate is about rational business interests versus racist working Australians.

It's insulting to suggest working Australians are so unsophisticated they can't tell the difference between Chinese people and the Chinese Communist Party.

Australian workers see CCP belligerence for what it is and billionaire self interest for what it is. They expect their leaders to represent neither.

Of course we should seek to keep trading with China. But regardless of what deals we strike, we should be ever mindful that authoritarian dictatorships are inherently fickle.

Democracies hold that the rules should trump the authority of any leader. China quite explicitly believes the opposite, which makes them unreliable. So, long term, we should ensure our fortunes are not tied to China alone.

That means retaking our status as a nation that makes things. Becoming a manufacturing powerhouse will require a variety of measures and excellent work is being done by the National COVID-19 Coordination Commission.

However, there are three easy wins available this year that could turbocharge our manufacturing sector.

Firstly, procurement. When we build roads, bridges, tunnels, schools and hospitals, it should be done using Australian-made products. You would think the idea of spending Australian tax dollars to support local Australian business would be common sense. Yet in recent years we've seen all manner of imported products in our infrastructure builds, from Spanish train carriages to dumped Chinese steel in our iconic buildings. With a pandemic-inspired infrastructure boom on the cards, we need to ensure Australian tax dollars power Australian industries.

Secondly, we need to seize Australia's sovereign advantage: affordable energy. We are blessed to live in a nation with abundant energy reserves: coal, gas, uranium, hydrogen, renewables - we have it all.

Yet somehow we manage to charge our businesses the world's highest prices for power. It's insane and it needs to end. Ensuring that our manufacturers have access to Australian gas at a globally advantageous rate would be the most obvious place to start. Instead of selling LNG to China at a discount, how about we keep some of that gas here to power Australian jobs.

Thirdly, we need to continue to block dumping. The Chinese government, for example, considers it advantageous to produce low-quality steel at below cost to prop up employment in key regions. That's fine, but we shouldn't allow that below-cost steel to be dumped on our market and undermine Australia's steel industry.

If we do these three things, and government creates the appropriate incentives for investment, the 2020s could be a decade characterised by the rise of Australian manufacturing. Australians will be able to proudly buy things made locally, Australian-made products can gain a name across the globe, and we can start freeing ourselves from the worrying market power we've handed over to an authoritarian regime. Daniel Walton is national secretary of the AWU
---
AUSTRALIA'S success flattening the coronavirus curve has prompted an invite to a special group for nations moving to reopen their economy.

The group - known as the "first movers" - is made up of countries deemed to have achieved relative success suppressing the COVID-19 pandemic and are now focused on easing restrictions.

Australia was invited to the group by Austrian Chancellor Sebastian Kurz (pictured) and joins an eclectic collection of countries including Denmark, Israel, New Zealand, Greece and the Czech Republic.

Prime Minister Scott Morrison dialled into the group's second official meeting last night to share Australia's progress in combating the health crisis and its plans to reopen parts of the economy.

It is understood international leaders have been particularly interested in Australia's success building up a strong testing and contact tracing capacity - including through the COVIDSafe app - as well as the co-operation achieved through the National Cabinet. While the group is yet to discuss Australia's hopes for an independent review of the COVID-19 outbreak, it is understood the idea has broad support as the European nations already have a similar motion going to the World Health Assembly this month.

Australia will support the EU-sponsored draft resolution on the "COVID-19 Response" and its call for an independent evaluation to consolidate lessons from the pandemic, when it goes before the Assembly on May 18.China has lashed out at the calls by Australia for a review into the origins of the crisis.
---
AUSTRALIA'S wine war with China may be escalated to the World Trade Organisation after Beijing announced it would continue massive tariffs on some winemakers from Down Under.

On Friday, China's Ministry of Commerce confirmed it would impose a tariff of 200 per cent as "anti-dumping measures on some Australian wine imports from March 28 for (another) five years".

China has previously acc-used Australian wine producers of "dumping", or lowering prices below the cost of manufacturing in a bid to -increase market share in its gigantic economy.

Beijing has accused the federal government of subsidising Australian wines in order for them to be exported and sold cheaply in China.

This is seen as an excuse to punish Australia for its temerity to question the origins of the COVID-19 pandemic.

Federal Trade Minister Dan Tehan has previously rejected suggestions Australia's wine industry was subsidised.

Department of Foreign -Affairs and Trade officials told Senate Estimates the value of Australian trade with China for almost all industries had plummeted by 40 per cent. Wine exports have sunk to less than $1 million.
---
POWDERFINGER'S John 'JC' Collins is starting a celebrity-led campaign against the "unfair" Annastacia Palaszczuk.

The bassist for the Brisbane band, who now owns The Triffid and Fortitude Music Hall, said it is crazy that venues and the thousands of workers and subcontractors they support are battling for survival while sporting events enjoy capacity crowds.

He is recruiting muso mates and sports stars for a campaign called Play Fair to shine a spotlight on the "unfairness".

"This is not about making money, it's about survival," Collins said. "We need help. Once JobKeeper ends, we don't know what's going to happen." Collins said that with the -widespread relaxation of COVID-19 restrictions, many people assumed music venues were back to normal.

"People think we're back fully open but we're not, far from it - we're still only operating at 30 per cent capacity," he said.

"It seems like a big contradiction when you've got capacity crowds for events like State of Origin and the (AFL) grand final at the Gabba, and almost 30,000 people at Suncorp Stadium for the Broncos season-opener last weekend," he said. "It doesn't look like there's much empathy for us."
---
Some sections of the media actually believe criticism of China is support for Trump

Virtually every statement Chinese authorities have made about coronavirus has been an outright lie.

China, echoed by the World Health Organisation, claimed the virus was "preventable and -controllable". They claimed there was no evidence of human-to-human transmission.

Activists and doctors who sounded the alarm about a new virus vanished or were arrested, and the lucky ones were punished with their faces splashed across the evening news in shame for allegedly spreading false information.

Genomics companies were ordered to destroy samples of the virus and testing of new cases of coronavirus was stopped entirely for a week in early January while Chinese internet authorities censored social media search terms like "SARS variation" and "Wuhan unknown pneumonia".

Even as hundreds and then -thousands become sick and the death toll rose, Chinese authorities continued to insist there was no evidence the new disease would spread widely and condemned travel restrictions from China.

Given there has been blatant -disinformation at every step of the way from the PRC, why is the world so quick to believe its story from early on in the piece, before any -investigations had taken place, that the coronavirus originated in the Wuhan seafood market?

Viruses have a long history of emerging from unhygienic wet -markets where live animals are slaughtered and even if the coronavirus didn't come from the wet market this time, there is cause for them to be shut down.

It is, as Scott Morrison repeatedly says, the most likely source of the -outbreak.

But it also needs to be confirmed.

If it came from a wet market, we need to know this to continue to strongly call for their closure or clean-up.

If it came from a Wuhan -laboratory, we need to know this to have a debate about whether "gain of function" research is worth the risk.

According to US embassy officials and scientists who visited the Wuhan Institute of Virology in 2018, there were serious concerns about safety practices and management weaknesses.

There have been also been several accidental laboratory leaks - even of SARS - and it is entirely possible this happened again.

The famous 'bat woman', Shi Zhengli, from the Wuhan Institute of Virology, even produced a -November 2015 joint-study that spoke of the incredible risk of the work she was doing.

"The potential to prepare for and mitigate future outbreaks must be weighed against the risk of creating more dangerous pathogens," the study states.

"Gain of function" research is such a heated area of scientific debate that the Obama administration withdrew funding from this type of research in 2014.

As Shi Zhengli said herself in -interviews, she was worried it was one of the viruses from her lab when she learnt of an outbreak, until -studying the genetic sequencing.

But, when every statement -Chinese authorities have issued in -relation to this virus has been -inaccurate, it is right that a global -investigation takes place into the -origins of the virus.

Yet, in the media and for some on the left, it's a case of your enemy's enemy is your friend.

They confuse criticism of the Chinese regime's response to COVID-19 with support for Trump.

The Trump administration was far too slow to understand the scale of the pandemic, unlike the Australian government, and the US death toll -reflects that.

Nine newspapers were left -embarrassed this week when less than a day after they posted a front-page story downplaying the inquiry into whether the virus accidentally leaked from a laboratory, the US's top spy released a rare statement -confirming this was at the heart of the investigation by intelligence agencies.

Just as I was making this point in my column, as if to prove its merit, questions have lobbed from the ABC's Media Watch!

Why did I not mention the Morrison government's view there was only a 5 per cent chance the virus leaked from a laboratory? Why did I not tell readers the bat virus being worked on by Shi Zhengli was not the same genetically as coronavirus and why did I not tell readers the overwhelming verdict from scientists is that the virus did not escape a lab?

If Paul Barry was an avid reader of The Daily Telegraph, he would know I broke the 5 per cent figure two weeks ago and that I mention -Morrison's view it was unlikely the virus originated in a lab in every single story.

Even worse for Media Watch, they seem not to be aware that Shi Zhengli has worked with dozens of viruses - not just one - and plans to map as many of the estimated 5000 coronaviruses from bats as she can.

And, finally, my story they are querying me on was not actually about the origins of the virus. It was about how the scientists at the centre of the global investigation studied bats in Australia.

Knowing how excited Tim Blair gets by Media Watch questions, my editor Ben English flicked them on to him.

Blair has helpfully offered a punchy intro for the program: "Hello. I'm Paul Barry, and welcome to Media Watch.

"It was billed by The Daily -Telegraph as a 'world exclusive', but was it? "Yes. It was.

"Next on Media Watch, the inside story of a television fat cat who is still on a $200,000 taxpayer-funded salary for presenting just 15 minutes of TV per week - while millions of -Australians are out of work or living on reduced pay." I digress, and now my column about China's lack of transparency over COVID-19 is over.Aah. Media Watch and the left win after all.
---
COVID-19 has also been a tough battle for the NRLW but one of its best has always fought to play, writes NICK WALSHAW KEZIE Apps has no idea if the NRL will let her play this year. But still, she trains anyway.

Always has.

Apps is no stranger to being told she cannot play rugby league. The first time, she was 11.

Back then, a little Bega Rooster who wanted no more than to carry on with teammates like Melbourne backrower Dale Finucane.

But Apps could really play.

Still, the game said no.

Which is why some time this year, the 2020 NRLW -season must go ahead. Not because athletes like Apps are shouting for it.

That isn't their way.

Just recently, NSW playmaker Maddie Studdon offered to go around for nothing if it meant keeping the year alive. But again, the girls have played for nothing long enough.

If the NRL wants to continue growing women's footy in step with, say, Cricket Australia - who recently had 80,000 fans attend a T20 World Cup final - the competition has to be staged.

It doesn't matter where those NRL millions have gone.

Athletes like Apps, Isabelle Kelly and Jess Sergis shouldn't be made to pay for it.

Remember too, how strongly the NRL defended that Origin kiss in its contentious Simply The Best commercial?

Well, now the rubber meets the road.

Importantly, NRL chief executive Todd Greenberg met recently with a group of Jillaroos to reiterate his organisation's focus on a "whole of game" return.

But still, no guarantees.

Regardless, Apps rises each morning on a dairy farm just outside Bega and, with her own employment also on hold, lifts weights, runs, sprints and practises footwork drills.

Regarded among the best athletes in the game, the Jillaroos backrower also conducts regular Zoom sessions with Chrisy Jaffrey, an exercise physiologist at the BaiMed Performance Centre.

Located just outside Wollongong, BaiMed boasts an impressive list of clients including Apps, Matildas striker Caitlin Foord, UFC champion Alex Volkanovski and, until recently, US basketball prodigy LaMelo Ball.

Asked this week how it felt to be training without knowing what was ahead, the St George Illawarra forward said: "Our issue, it's just sport.

"And we realise, right now, there are people out there going through far worse. "But for the women's competition not to go ahead this year, given everything we've achieved, it would be heartbreaking.

"In 2019, our Origin game was the most watched female sport on TV with over a million viewers.

"It would be such a shame to have to start over." Apps, who only took up the game again aged 23, also remains convinced a time will come when the NRLW will be the domain of only professionals.

"And that's when the skill level will increase dramatically," she said. "Who knows when that happens. But it will.

"We realise there's still a lot of work to be done, and that we need to build our fan base, but what the NRL has helped us achieve so far, it's been brilliant." Which is why if the men play this year, so must Apps.She has already missed out too often.
---
THE NRL's Project Apollo team is ready to deliver a State of Origin game to Queensland under high-level plans to celebrate the 40-year legacy of Maroons Immortal Arthur Beetson.

The Sunday Telegraph can reveal "Project Artie" is underway, with the Queensland Rugby League having held talks with Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk to push for an Origin game to be played at Suncorp Stadium this season.

And the move has the backing of ARL Commission chairman Peter V'landys, who is working on a schedule that has provisions for one Origin game at Queensland's home of rugby league this year.

V'landys will meet with Palaszczuk in the next fortnight in a move to open the Sunshine State's borders to rugby league.

The Queensland government has put out the welcome mat to rugby league in one of the most significant steps to overcoming COVID-19 border restrictions to revive the NRL competition on May 28.

Premier Palaszczuk caused a storm this week when she claimed Queensland had no hope of hosting State of Origin this season, a scenario that also appeared to deliver a hammer blow to the resumption of the NRL. But The Sunday Telegraph can reveal the Queensland government is open to a proposal from the NRL and Origin, and V'landys has vowed to table a considered plan to allow rugby league's Project Apollo mission to take off.

A Queensland government spokesman told The Sunday Telegraph last night the Premier is ready for dialogue with the ARL Commission and will consider a submission for NRL travel north of the border.

State of Origin is due to celebrate its 40th anniversary this season. Game three at Suncorp Stadium was pencilled in for July 8, the very day Beetson famously led the Queensland side on to Lang Park in the inaugural Origin clash in 1980.

The pandemic has thrown the QRL's planned celebrations into disarray and there are fears that Queensland's strict border controls could see all three Origin games played in NSW as a contingency.

But V'landys told The Sunday Telegraph he is determined to reward fans with an Origin clash on Beetson's Queensland soil, especially if a mooted series in October provides scope for a full house at Suncorp.

"I think we will have an Origin game in Queensland," V'landys said. "Beetson was a legend so it would be great to celebrate an Origin game up there. When we can show the (Queensland) Premier there are no biosecurity concerns, I'm sure we can be on the same page on State of Origin."Asked whether Origin would be played in October, V'landys said: "I can't comment on Origin in October. That's one of the discussions points with broadcasters and we have agreed to remain confidential until we have an agreement."
---
ADVICE to the Morrison government as early as February suggested that COVID-19 may have been an inadvertent leak from a Wuhan laboratory, three senior federal sources have confirmed.

The Daily Telegraph can reveal in the early days of the outbreak the probability was initially placed at around 50 per cent that COVID-19 was accidentally released from a bio-containment facility but this was swiftly downgraded to a five per cent chance as more became known about the virus.

Responding to The Daily Telegraph's revelations that Five Eyes intelligence agencies were looking at the Wuhan Institute of Virology after it was revealed two senior scientists had worked in Australia studying live bats, Health Minister Greg Hunt said the reason Australia wanted a review was to understand "exactly" how the coronavirus started.

"We want a clear, independent, fearless global review of the origins, the actions, and the global path forward, in relation to this and all future pandemics," he said.

In the upper echelons of the Morrison government it is now considered unlikely the naturally-occurring, highly-infectious coronavirus came from a laboratory but that further investigations are required to advance world knowledge and prevent future pandemics.

Home Affairs Minister Peter Dutton said while he could not comment on the Telegraph's report that senior Wuhan Institute of Virology scientists Peng Zhou and Shi Zhengli studied bats at the CSIRO's Australian Animal Health Laboratory, he said: "Obviously, ASIO and our agencies do a lot of work with their international counterparts, particularly the Five Eyes community. We've looked at a number of cases, particularly over the last couple of years," he said. "But it's not something I'd comment on in terms of the investigation." Mr Zhou - the head of the Bat Virus Infection and Immunity Project at the Wuhan Institute of Virology - spent three years at the bio-containment facility Australian Animal Health Laboratory between 2011 and 2014.

The other scientist whose work is being looked at is Ms Zhengli, who is the director of the Centre for Emerging Infectious Diseases at the Chinese Academy of Sciences' Wuhan Institute of Virology. She also spent time in Australia in 2006 at the Animal Health Laboratory.When the COVID-19 outbreak occurred in Wuhan, Ms Zhengli said she had sleepless nights worrying whether it was released from her laboratory but has since strongly denied this occurred. The Daily Telegraph does not suggest the two scientists are responsible for the outbreak or spread of COVID-19, but merely that they have come to the attention of intelligence agencies.
---
THE NRL has finally put a figure on the financial damage caused by COVID-19. In talks with club bosses this week, it is understood NRL chief executive Andrew Abdo told them the game was budgeting for losses of up to $250"million this season.

Last year, the game generated more than $552 million in revenue, although that figure included $24 million in contra from the broadcasters.

That target has been downgraded this season to as little as $280 million, although the hope is that with the help of the broadcasters they can push the figure north of $300 million.

Regardless, the losses are devastating as the strain on the game is exacerbated by the $13 million in additional costs that have been dedicated towards bringing rugby league back on schedule. Those costs include the fees incurred in the hiring of biosecurity experts, charter flights and housing of the Warriors.

While players have been guaranteed 80 per cent of their contract figures, clubs have been told they will receive their $1.1 million grant for the remaining five months of this season.

They have agitated for more, although it is understood that at their meeting on Tuesday night they were told the NRL would absorb some of the costs that would normally go their way.

Like every sport around the globe, the NRL has budgeted to suffer devastating losses over the course of this year due to the absence of gate receipts and corporate support while fans are locked out of venues.

The NRL's financial reports for last season indicated that non-broadcast revenue increased by 25 per cent to $203.9 million in 2019.

"The largest contributor to the uplift being major events ($16.6 million) as a result of the new Magic Round and an improved (State of) Origin series and premiership grand final," the report said. "Corporate partnership revenues also increased." Magic Round has been put on ice due to the outbreak of COVID-19. At the same time, the NRL is expected to miss out on the money that would have come from playing an Origin game in Adelaide. The NRL will also lose significant money if the grand final is played without crowds.Broadcast revenue, or at least the size of it, also remains in doubt due to ongoing talks with the Nine Network and Foxtel. It is understood club officials were given little clarity over the progress of broadcast negotiations.
---
FOOTBALLERS are notoriously bad at protecting their health, a claim proven each summer when they book up enough work to keep surgeons in expensive European cars for a good 12 months, and often more.

Post-game dressing rooms often look like a MASH unit.

The reason is as simple as players often feel a loyalty to teammates that measures somewhere above even their own welfare.

Given that, Tommy Trbojevic should be eliminated from -Origin consideration for the good of himself.

It is not enough to give Trbojevic the choice, as NSW coach Brad Fittler and offsider Greg Alexander favour, which sounds fair and democratic but puts Trbojevic in a compromised position.

There is a loyalty in Trbojevic that is uncommon. He will feel compelled to do the right thing by Fittler and Alexander and play the game, even if it comes at his own expense.

On Saturday he made his long-awaited return to the field after missing 13 weeks with a hamstring injury and he lasted all of 62 minutes before he was out again, this time nursing a shoulder injury.

It got worse, though.

The next day Fittler put a microphone in front of him and asked if he was right to play for NSW in the State of Origin series beginning -November 4.

It all seemed good humoured on the surface.

"If the coach picks me," -Trbojevic said.

Fittler replied: "If you stop sooking you're the first man in the team." It was pure theatre. An in-joke, given everyone knows Fittler also doubles as the NSW coach, that everyone was allowed to share.

The Sea Eagles were unhappy with the interview and believe Trbojevic felt compelled to do it - and also declare his availability - because while Fittler was there as the interviewer it was clear to Trbojevic that he was the NSW coach.

Trbojevic is not ready for Origin this season. To pick him would be a disservice to him and to the Sea Eagles, who pay his wage. He would feel compelled to play whether he was physically ready or not.

Trbojevic began the season strongly and played until round six when his hamstring went ping and he could not return until round 19.

Most of the 13-week break away from rugby league was spent on light duties, repairing what might not only be the longest hamstring in the game, but the most talked about.

Trbojevic was underdone for Manly on Saturday and it would take a supreme dose of optimism to believe he would be ready to play for the Blues in another six weeks.

It has almost been missed that Trbojevic's injury on Saturday falls into the pattern of a long and damaging season. One of the hallmarks of this year is the staggering injury rate which has made it as much a test of survival as talent.

At one point almost a quarter of registered players in the NRL this season were sidelined with injury.

Injuries have decimated Manly's season. The Sea Eagles were widely tipped to make the playoffs before the season and were seventh when Trbojevic went down in round six.

Add five-eighth Dylan Walker to the injured list and hooker Manase Fainu, who did not even make the season start, and the Sea Eagles have battled most of the season without three-quarters of their -starting spine.

Coaches have no doubt why the injury toll has been so significant. Teams spent all summer preparing for the season and then managed to get off only two games before the competition was suspended due to COVID-19. When the announcement came that the season would be resumed after a nine-week break, teams were given only a few weeks at training before play resumed, a preparation most coaches complained was too brief.

But the league was in a hurry to restart the season.

Players were rushed back with minimal contact in training. This lack of proper preparation, coaches believe, was the greatest contributor to the injury toll. Players were simply underprepared for the physicality of the game.

As Trbojevic was on Saturday, and will be in six weeks time when Origin is picked. The job, if he is picked, will be to play at Origin intensity after one game in 19 weeks. Trbojevic will answer the call because that is the kind of man he is. But it is a choice he should not have to make.
---
THE race for this year's title has turned into a survival of the fittest, but some unfair advantages have exposed why not every team is getting an equal opportunity in 2020.

And as a mounting injury crisis grows, a leading expert has revealed why "major injuries" can be traced back to clubs which are struggling to cope with changes caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.

NRL physio Brien Seeney said that while overall injuries were slightly down this year, the number of injuries sidelining players for five weeks or more had almost doubled - jumping from 3.97 per round in 2018 to 6.64 in 2020.

Thursday's blockbuster between the Sydney Roosters and Melbourne has been robbed of another big name in Storm superstar Cameron Munster (knee), who has joined Cameron Smith (shoulder) on a growing list of outs.

And the Roosters had nine players missing for last Thursday's win over St George -Illawarra.

Manly's Addin Fonua-Blake also injured a knee on the weekend as the Sea Eagles' season went from bad to worse, while Siliva Havili's tricep -injury is another blow to -Canberra.

Injuries have to be factored in every year but this season the 18 uninterrupted rounds on top of all the other changes has just turned it into an ironman event. There are no byes because of the post-season State of Origin, adding to the strain as we count down to the finals.

While no one is questioning the mighty job the NRL has done to get the comp back up and keep it going, it has come at a hefty cost to player health and injury management.

There are also some huge unfair advantages, specifically those relating to travel.

Just look at weekend rivals Penrith and Canberra.

The Raiders have racked up close to 70 hours of travel time this season. Ten of their 13 games have required long-haul trips by road or plane.

Competition frontrunners the Panthers have had just one game outside Sydney all season, against Gold Coast.

The Panthers' other "big" trip was to Lottoland to play Manly, a distance of 76km. They have also had three games at Kogarah, 65km away.

The Raiders basically have a six-hour road trip every time they play in Sydney given they can't stay at a hotel the night before a game or after it. And it all has an effect on prehab and rehab for players.

While Ivan Cleary was complaining about two questionable calls that went against Penrith during Saturday's win, the Canberra players were preparing to board the bus for another long haul back to the nation's capital.

It puts things in perspective.

While everyone understands there was little anyone could do to make it completely fair to all clubs, that doesn't deny that some clubs have been hugely disadvantaged.

Although, there are extenuating circumstances affecting every club to a degree. Newcastle has also had a stack of travel after home games were transferred to Gosford for a period, and the Knights were missing eight regulars in their smashing win over Wests Tigers on Saturday. Manly has been severely bashed up. Powerhouse prop Fonua-Blake (knee) is expected to miss two weeks, while big Marty Taupau is in doubt after a sickening stiff arm from Jack Hetherington.
---
WORLD EXCLUSIVE Government dossier reveals virus cover-up

THE Australian government trained and employed a team of Chinese scientists, whose laboratory is now the subject of a probe into the origins of COVID-19.

The laboratory genetically modified deadly coronaviruses that could be transmitted from bats to humans, causing illness that had no cure.

A dossier compiled by Western governments and obtained by The Saturday Telegraph features the Wuhan lab now at the centre of intelligence agencies' investigations to determine if an accidental release caused the coronavirus pandemic.

The laboratory, led by scientist Shi Zhengli, and its research feature in the dossier, which points to several studies they conducted as areas of concern.

It cites the lab's work discovering samples of coronavirus from a bat cave in China with a striking genetic similarity to COVID-19, along with research synthesising a bat-derived coronavirus that could not be treated.

The document lays the foundation for accusing China of a general cover-up, stating it deliberately engaged in the "suppression and destruction of evidence", in an "assault on international transparency" and to the "endangerment- of other countries".SPECIAL REPORT PAGES 6-9
---
January seems like a lifetime ago, but how closely have you been really been watching the headlines that followed? ROY O'REILLY puts your news knowledge to the test

1 General Motors retired which iconic brand in Australia?

2 To celebrate International Women's Day, the iconic British train the Flying Scotsman was rebranded with which name for a month?

3 Westpac was fined $1.3 billion for how many breaches of anti-money laundering legislation (a) 23 (b) 230 (c) 23,000,000?

4 Prince Harry and Meghan Markle officially started their lives separate from the royal family on (a) April Fool's Day (b) Good Friday (c) Queen's birthday?

5 An oil painting, titled Show Me The Monet by which British street artist, sold at auction for $14 million?

6 Which 1977 Fleetwood Mac song reached number four on the ARIA charts?

7 The former king of which European country fled his country to live in a Dominican Republic luxury resort following a corruption scandal over his financial dealings while monarch?

8 Who won the Oscar for Best Actress?

9What is the name of the new Australian dollar coin which encourages people to give to charity?

10 Which horse won the Melbourne Cup?

11 Who was returned as prime minister after leading the Labour Party to a landslide victory in the New Zealand national general election?

12 The FBI investigated reports by pilots of two airliners over Los Angeles that what flew past them (a) blow-up flying elephant (b) car with wings (c) man in a jetpack?

13 Sky News launched a 24-hour news channel exclusively reporting on which topic?

14 Disco was the 15th album of which Australian "pop princess"?

15 Vincent Namatjira, the great-grandson of legendary desert artist Albert Namatjira, won which major art prize for portraiture?

16 Nicole Kidman played an affluent New York therapist in which TV show? 17 KFC announced it would cease using which slogan because it was "a bit off" during the COVID-19 pandemic?

18 The Duke of Edinburgh celebrated which birthday (a) 95th (b) 97th (c) 99th?

19 Which federal minister resigned after a sports grants controversy?

20 Who became the first to win a third Norm Smith Medal?

21 Which religious leader voiced support for same-sex couples, calling them "children of God"?

22 The Australian Space Agency HQ was officially opened in which state capital?

23 Name the 100-year-old English World War II veteran knighted by the Queen after raising over $59 million for health charities by walking 100 laps of his garden.

24 Which company launched earbuds which look like large baked beans (a) Apple (b) Panasonic (c) Samsung?

25 A court was told that which Queensland billionaire baulked at paying $150 000 to use Twisted Sister's We're Not Gonna Take It in an advertising blitz during the 2019 federal election campaign?

26 HRT: Husband Replacement Therapy was a new book launched by which Australian?

27 Which US entertainment giant added extended disclaimers to classics, including Peter Pan and Aristocats to warn viewers the films carry derogatory stereotypes about minorities?

28 Nestle announced that the names of which two lollies would be scrapped to comply with cancel culture?

29 Name the Australian of the Year.

30 Which tennis star tested positive to COVID-19 after hosting a tournament in the Balkan region?

31 Boris Johnson said he was looking forward to buying cheaper packets of which Australian biscuits?

32 Which princess married Italian property developer Edoardo Mapelli Mozzi?

33 McDonald's took legal action against which rival fast food giant for marketing one of its products as the Big Jack burger?

34 Which founding member of the Skyhooks died at the age of 72 "in one of those stupid ladder accidents"?

35 Saudi Arabia announced the completion of the restoration of the house of which British soldier whose exploits inspired the 1962 movie Lawrence of Arabia?

36 Which star of the TV show Kath & Kim was featured on a postage stamp in the Legends series?

37 Which US technology boss joined the so-called Centibillionaire Club?

38 "I have never met a more reprehensible human being," said TV news journalist Peta Credlin about which former Australian prime minister?

39 The entire national cabinet of which middle-eastern country resigned six days after a huge explosion destroyed a large part of the country's capital?

40 Queensland's victorious team in State of Origin 1 had how many debutants (a) six (b) eight (c) ten?

41 It was revealed that which items, with a total value of almost $20 000, were controversially gifted as bonuses to four Australia Post executives in 2018?

42 After previously holding the office of Chancellor of Austria from 2017 to 2019, who was re-appointed to the position at the age of 33?

43 Which Australian VC recipient revealed that as a child one of his jobs was to tend his father's dope crop?

44 On live TV, what did US House Speaker Nancy Pelosi do to her copy of President Trump's State of the Union address?

45 Which gaming boss admitted to making "shameful" threats to a potential buyer of Crown Resorts?

46 Which two-time Oscar winner and star of the 1939 movie Gone With The Wind died at the age of 104?

47 Which 94-year-old resigned as prime minister of Malaysia?

48 Which technology giant became the first US company to achieve a $2 trillion valuation?

49 Which Australian cardinal's child abuse convictions were quashed by the High Court?

50 Which Victorian opening batsmen set the record (486) for the highest Sheffield Shield partnership?

Sources: The Courier-Mail, The Sunday Mail, Nine Network, Seven Network, Ten Network, ABC Radio, Wikipedia.

ANSWERS 1. Holden. 2. Flying Scotswoman. 3. (c) 23 000 000. 4. (a) April Fool's Day. 5. Banksy. 6. Dreams. 7. Spain. (King Juan Carlos I). 8. Renée Zellweger. 9. Donation Dollar. 10. Twilight Payment. 11. Jacinda Ardern. 12. (c) man in a jetpack. 13. COVID-19. 14. Kylie Minogue. 15. Archibald Prize. 16. The Undoing. 17. "It's finger-lickin' good". 18. (c) 99th. 19. Bridget McKenzie. 20. Dustin Martin. 21. Pope Francis. 22. Adelaide. 23. Captain Tom Moore. 24. (c) Samsung. 25. Clive Palmer. 26. Kathy Lette. 27. Disney. 28. Chicos, Red Skins. 29. Dr James Muecke. 30. Novak Djokovic. 31. Arnott's Tim Tams. 32. Princess Beatrice. 33. Hungry Jack's. 34. Bob "Bongo" Starkie. 35. TE Lawrence. 36. Magda Szubanski. 37. Mark Zuckerberg. 38. Malcolm Turnbull. 39. Lebanon. 40. (b) eight. 41. Cartier watches. 42. Sebastian Kurz. 43. Daniel Keighran. 44. Ripped it up. 45. James Packer. 46. Olivia de Havilland. 47. Mahathir Mohamad. 48. Apple. 49. Cardinal George Pell. 50. Marcus Harris (239), Will Pucovski (255 not out).
---
THE Prime Minister has dec-lared Australia's democracy "is not up for trade" after China -issued a laundry list of sins it says Australia has committed, including seeking an investigation into the origin of COVID-19 and speaking up on human rights.

It comes as the Five Eyes -intelligence nations, including Australia, New Zealand, the UK, Canada and US, issued a joint statement condemning China for disqualifying several Hong Kong politicians in what it called "a concerted campaign to silence all critical voices".

China released a list of issues it claims have damaged the trade relationship it has with Australia, ranging from rejecting Chinese bids to building the 5G network, speaking out on Hong Kong's democracy and human rights abuses in Xinjian; linking cyber attacks in Australia to China; and introducing foreign influence laws.

Prime Minister Scott Morrison on Thursday said Australia was not making China the enemy, but that our nation would not compromise on its national interests either.

"We will respect the decisions of other countries, but our values aren't up for trade. Our democracy is not up for trade and our sovereignty is not up for trade," he said.

"We won't be compromising on the fact we will set what our foreign investment laws are or how we build our 5G telecommunications networks or how we run our systems protecting against interference in the way we run our country." The statement from Five Eyes said China's actions in Hong Kong had breached its obligations under the legally-binding Sino-British joint declaration, from the handover of the autonomous region in 1997.
---
Government shutdown threat for future NRL breaches DEPUTY Premier John -Barilaro has warned that the NSW Government could shutdown the NRL season if players again breach COVID-19 guidelines, saying: "This is the warning shot." A crucial figure in rugby league's push to restart on May 28, Barilaro has told The Daily Telegraph he supports the decision to fine, rather than suspend, NRL stars Latrell Mitchell, Nathan Cleary and Josh Addo-Carr for serious public health breaches.

CONTINUED PAGE 78 FROM BACK PAGE Despite calls from several commentators, including Phil Gould, to ban all three players for the season, they will now be free to play after paying a combined $44,000.

Yesterday, the NRL fined Mitchell and Addo-Carr $50,000 each (60 per cent of which is suspended) for their northern NSW camping trip.

Penrith No.7 Nathan Cleary was also slugged $10,000 (60 per cent suspended) after images emerged of him socialising at home on Anzac Day with at least five young women.

While each player also received a one-match ban, that too has been suspended until the end of the season.

A fourth player, Newcastle's Tyronne Roberts-Davis, received the same sanctions as Cleary after attending the same camping trip as Mitchell and Addo-Carr.

Barilaro described the sanctions as "fair" but warned that further indiscretions could mean the code is shut down immediately.

"This is the warning shot," said Barilaro, who has played a major role in several negotiations, including getting the -Warriors into Australia by May 4.

"When the game gets going again, no player can breach the rules. Once the NRL competition is up and running, players must understand their actions could have broader ramifications for the entire game.

"We understand no player has ever been bigger than rugby league. Which is why it's important in this situation we deal with individuals and don't punish the game.

"Or not yet. But if this happens again when the season is back under way, if there are more and more breaches, the NRL will be held accountable by both the public and the NSW Government." Asked if the sanctioned trio, who all represented NSW in Origin last year, had put the code's hyped season restart in doubt, Barilaro said: "I don't think it has sabotaged what we are trying to do.

"But it isn't helpful. We have convinced a lot of people to get this season under way again, but not everyone. I'm arguing (to government) that the NRL is putting measures in place to deal with all the restrictions around COVID-19, then before we even get going a couple of players breach those rules.

"People are working tirelessly to get rugby league going again and these -players jeopardise that." NSW Police are also investigating Cleary over possible breaches of social distancing after images of the Panthers halfback emerged with girls, said to be friends of his sister. It is alleged the group stayed only briefly at a home the 22-year-old shares with fellow Panther Tyrone May.

Asked about the fines, ARLC chairman Peter V'landys suggested the players had put "the game and the community at risk"."It's certainly hard to accept such behaviour when the game is doing everything it can to persuade the community that its players are responsible and behave appropriately," he said.
---
PAUL McGregor and Dean Pay are not the only two NRL coaches under extreme pressure.

The word out of the Shire is that John Morris desperately needed last night's vastly improved effort to ease pressure.

It hasn't helped losing Bronson Xerri and Josh Morris, but their terrible performance against the Wests Tigers last week raised questions about the coach's future.

Your columnist keeps hearing Cronulla wants Shane Flanagan back once he's cleared by the NRL.

That could be as early as next season now that Todd Greenberg is out of the game and with Peter V'landys prepared to revisit his case.

Whoever is in charge, the Sharks are facing a couple of years of pain until their inconsistent big names come off contract and they can bring in fresh faces.

Costly move to fullback LATRELL Mitchell is in danger of costing himself $90,000 by playing fullback at the South Sydney Rabbitohs.

That's his match payments for playing for NSW against the Maroons in State of Origin, which has been pushed back this year because of COVID-19 to November 4, 11 and 18.

Latrell is no hope of playing fullback ahead of James Tedesco or Tom Trbojevic. However, it's a different story if he is playing his best football in the centres.

Trbojevic and Jack Wighton played centre last year after Latrell was dropped, but Wighton could easily be switched to five-eighth if necessary.

The money is important to Latrell in a season where he has already lost $100,000 by rejecting the Roosters' $800,000 offer, to take $700,000 at the Rabbitohs.

Bennett blame game IT'S interesting Anthony Seibold is copping all the blame for the disarray at the Brisbane Broncos. This is not entirely fair.

People seem to have forgotten who actually assembled this team and put Anthony Milford on $1 million, Jack Bird on $900,000 and Darius Boyd on $800,000.

His name is Wayne Bennett.

The Broncos have slumped to the two worst losses in history in their past five games.

The scoreline has been 93-6 against them in the past two weeks. This is not the first time Bennett has left a club on its knees. Think Newcastle and his departure in 2014 and the wooden spoons in 2015, 2016 and 2017.
---
IT IS the phone call that everyone dreads - and it can now be revealed that more than 24,000 people across the State have received one.

For the first time since NSW Health contact tracing teams began the painstaking job of tracking down people who may have been infected, the State government has released details on just how many people have told they may have the virus. Since the first case of COVID-19 was confirmed in Australia in late January, the Public Health Emergency Operations Centre has overseen around 120 daily phone calls with those contacted told to self-isolate and watch for symptoms.

The calls have been "close contacts" associated with 3653 positive cases. A close contact is someone that has been face-to-face with another person for 15 minutes or being in the same room such as a restaurant for two or more hours, others regarded as a "casual contact".

Contact tracing team director Carolyn Murray said there were around 300 people now tracking close contacts compared with "four to six" in March. Staff were given a list of people to call and script to use in passing on the necessary information, she said.

"The quicker we can get someone diagnosed and then the list of people they've been in contact with, the quicker we can get people to self-isolate," Ms Murray said.

"We would hope, if we find out about people in the morning that are a close contact, that we would have contacted them by the end of the day.

"Some people will have more than 50 contacts, or 100 contacts, and everyone of those individuals is called by us. That's a lot of calls to make. Every day feels like a week." As well as staff from NSW Health, others making the calls include Australian Defence Force personnel, Qantas workers and Taronga Zoo employees.

The figures are in addition to 1.8 million COVID-19 tests that have been carried out across 280 testing sites, including 40 drive-through clinics and 17 pop-up sites with NSW Health Pathology supported by both private clinics and GPs across the State.

While contact tracing was a critical component of the response, Chief Health Officer Dr Kerry Chant thanked people who themselves had voluntarily come forward for testing - a move that remained crucial. "Right now we need to stamp out any undetected infections which may be lurking in the community," she said.

Health Minister Brad Hazzard praised staff fighting one of biggest health crises the State had ever faced.

"The extensive work undertaken to protect the community over the past eight months has been nothing short of awe-inspiring," he said.

Hospitals and clinicians are working to quadruple ICU capacity from 500 to 2,000, with capacity now at over 1900.

More than 800 new ventilators have also been delivered. Since January, the NSW Health Pathology team has been working to sequence genomes to examine the origin.
---
EXCLUSIVE Intel agencies uneasy about US virus theory

THE Australian government and its intelligence agencies are understood to be growing increasingly uneasy with the US President's bold claims COVID-19 probably leaked from a Wuhan laboratory.

The origins of coronavirus, and whether it inadvertently leaked from the Wuhan Institute of Virology, is the subject of an investigation by the Five Eyes Intelligence agencies of Australia, New Zealand, Canada, US and UK.

The Daily Telegraph understands the central concern emerging from the Australian government and its security- agencies is that the US may be putting undue emphasis on the theory the virus originated in a Wuhan laboratory.

In an extraordinary comparison, one senior federal source said there were emerging fears in the intelligence community that the US administration could be repeating mistakes made by George Bush and Tony Blair when they pressured the UN weapons inspector to declare Saddam- Hussein possessed weapons of mass destruction.

In recent days the lab-leak line of inquiry has been promoted as the most likely cause of the outbreak by US President Donald Trump and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, who said there was "a significant amount of evidence" to support it.

The Daily Telegraph understands Australia has seen all of the evidence the US possesses under the intelligence sharing arrangement and there is nothing yet to strongly suggest the naturally-occurring virus came out of the laboratory rather than the wet market. This has led to unrest within Australian intelligence agencies.

The ultimate goal of both the Australian and US governments is the same; seeing China held accountable for its negligence and cover-up of the outbreak which has cost tens of thousands of lives around the world.

On Saturday, The Daily Telegraph published a dossier compiled by concerned Western governments that lays out the case against China over its "suppression and destruction of evidence", its "deadly denial of human-to-human transmission" and its "assault on international transparency" as it sought to cover-up the coronavirus contagion.

While the end-goal of holding China accountable is consistent, the schism between the US executives' position on China's culpability for the outbreak and the Australian intelligence agencies has put Scott Morrison in an awkward position.

The Australian government's official- position is that COVID-19 most likely originated in a wet market and there is a 5 per cent chance it was born as a result of an accident in the Wuhan Institute of Virology.

Mr Morrison is taking a more nuanced- approach than the US that avoids direct accusations against China as he seeks to build consensus for an inquiry at the World Health Assembly in Geneva next month.

The Prime Minister wrote to the G20 nations on Monday, pitching a review into the pandemic response.

"What's really important is that we have a proper review, an independent review, which looks into the sources of these things in a transparent way so we can learn," he said.It is understood Mr Morrison does not want to publicly undermine comments- made by either Mr Trump or Mr Pompeo, with whom the Prime Minister has a particularly good rapport-. In recent days Mr Trump said he has seen evidence that he was not allowed to share which supported the theory the coronavirus was an accidental- leak from a facility in Wuhan, where there have been concerns about safety practices.
---
SYDNEY'S top private schools have been forced to ban parents from attending sport events this weekend in order to meet strict COVID-19 conditions imposed by venues across NSW.

The Athletic Association of Greater Public Schools (AAGPS) had to cut crowds at yesterday's Convenors Swimming Invitational at Sydney Olympic Park and at today's St Joseph's College Regatta at the Sydney International -Regatta Centre.

The announcement - a week after more than 36 000 spectators were permitted to gather and watch the State of Origin Game 2 at ANZ Stadium - frustrated parents. To add to confusion, some school summer fixtures had been able to host limited spectators at school venues.

The AAGPS, however, had no choice but to comply with the specific capacity limitations and conditions of each sporting venue selected by the participating schools. "The allowance of spectators at all other summer sporting fixtures will remain the responsibility of individual member schools and will vary between indoor and outdoor venues and individual school facility capacities" the AAGPS said. The swimming and rowing will be lifestreamed.
---
I am not a China basher and think that a lot of the flak that gets directed to our most powerful Asian neighbour often stems from fears and suspicions that are -rooted in prejudice. The modern-day economic success of Australia has been inextricably linked to the economic growth of China.

The balance is skewed heavily in our favour, too, with the -Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade recording that in 2018-19 Australian exported $134 billion in goods and services to China and imported just $78 -billion. But the growing tensions between Beijing and Canberra over our government's support for an independent inquiry into the origin and management of COVID-19 in China's Hubei province should serve as a reminder of an important truth.  Australia is a democracy, China is not. Australia values transparency. China does not.

And some things matter more than money - especially a pandemic that has killed more than 200,000 worldwide.

The manner in which Beijing has responded to the very suggestion of an inquiry says a fair bit about the political character of the nation. The way China is behaving right now is nothing short of a disgrace. It is eminently possible that China is responsible for destroying Australian lives and much of the Australian economy on account of its handling of the coronavirus outbreak, and now audaciously threatens to do us more harm as a result of us supporting an independent inquiry into how this pandemic started.

If ever you needed a demonstration of the political values guiding our two countries, this is it. China's diplomats have engaged in the opposite of diplomacy when it comes to the mooted coronavirus inquest, opting instead to bully us with dark threats our beef industry and the wine industry will be targeted if Australia "singles out" China for scrutiny.

The idea of "singling out" China is a bizarre one. No one is "singling out" China for any other reason than the virus actually originated there, in circumstances that deserve thorough and independent scrutiny.

There is a real risk that China might find itself isolated as a -result of its actions if it continues to behave in its current belligerent fashion. Chinese ambassador to Australia Cheng Jingye has massively overplayed his hand by threatening retaliation.

It is offensive and tasteless stand-over stuff that does him or his nation no benefit. Cheng is not alone, either. There have been instances this past month in Brazil, Iran, Singapore and in a number of European countries where Chinese diplomats have been acting like a bunch of Twitter trolls, bagging their host nations for having the temerity to question China's management of this outbreak.

It has been good to see the -extent to which Canberra is sticking to its guns on this question.Until such a time as China is a democracy, or at the very least a more benign one-party state, its hostility towards criticism and -opposition to transparency will be a recurring challenge in our economic relationship.
---
Amid subdued commemorations of the 250th anniversary of James Cook's landing, the Enlightenment explorer is still making waves, writes James Morrow

It's fair to say that this year's commemorations of James Cook's arrival have not gone according to plan.

Thanks to COVID-19, there were no fireworks, no speeches, none of the hullabaloo that would normally accompany the 250th anniversary of the English explorer, navigator, map maker and scientist's arrival at Botany Bay last Wednesday.

About the only predictable thing that remained were the culture wars around Cook, which flared up on Thursday when the somewhat ironically named Annaleise van Diemen - Deputy Chief Medical Officer of Victoria - tweeted her thoughts about the event.

"Sudden arrival of an invader from another land, decimating populations, creating terror. Forces the population to make enormous sacrifices & completely change how they live in order to survive", van Diemen wrote, adding, "COVID-19 or Cook 1770?" It's a far cry from celebrations marking the 200th anniversary of Cook's landing in 1970. Then, even the New York Times got in on the act, with a travel feature advising readers 1970 would be "a special year for a trip to Australia".

"Colourful observances commemorating the great British navigator's historic explorations in 1770 will be held in Sydney and numerous other picturesque Australian cities and towns. A highlight in Sydney will be an international exposition, Panorama Of The Pacific from March 20 to March 30. Many countries with shores on the Pacific Ocean will participate in the show," the Times' Robert Trumbull wrote.

"Advance reservations indicate that thousands of overseas visitors will attend various events affiliated with the year-long Cook bicentenary celebration." So how did things change so much in fifty years? Why has Cook gone from hero to - at least in some quarters - hate figure? And who was Captain James Cook?

Humble origins While indigenous Australians have proudly lived on this land for tens of thousands of years, there is a strong case to be made that, even though federation would not occur for over a century, James Cook was the first modern Australian.

Like so many Australians, Cook was every bit the self-made man, not bound by the class boundaries and limitations of the old country but rather restless and determined to make his own way in the world.

When he was born, on October 27, 1728, the son of a Scottish farmhand in the hardly glamorous precinct of Marton-on-Cleveland, Yorkshire, there was no indication of what his life would hold.

Leaving school at the age of 12 to work as a farmhand alongside his father, then as an assistant in a nearby village shop, Cook would eventually be apprenticed to the owner of a small fleet of coal ships.

There, he would discover his passion not just for the sea (he spent most of the following nine years on the water), but for self-improvement, using the winter months when his master's vessels were laid up to study navigation and mathematics.

It was during this time, he would later write, that he formed what he would in 1774 describe (while an ice field closed in around his ship deep in the Antarctic) an "ambition not only to go farther than any one had done before, but as far as it was possible for man to go".

James King, who accompanied Cook on his third voyage, noted Cook's extraordinary personality, writing: "it's most distinguishing feature was that unremitting perseverance in the pursuit of his object, which was not only superior to the opposition of dangers, and the pressure of hardships, but even exempt from the want of ordinary relaxation." A man of his age Whereas in the previous age of exploration, sea captains set out in the service of God and country (hoping to sail home laden to the gunwales with treasure), Cook was a creature of the Enlightenment age, which elevated science and scientific discovery above all.

It was, in short, an era made for a man like Cook who - according to his biographer JC Beaglehole, who edited all three of Cook's journals of exploration - had "no politics" and "no religion".

Instead, Beaglehole says Cook had "the genius of the matter of fact. He was profoundly competent in his calling as seaman. He was completely professional in his trade as explorer. He had, in large part, the sceptical mind: he did not like taking on trust. He was therefore the great dispeller of illusion." It's a point underlined by Gregory Melleuish, associate professor of history and politics at the University of Wollongong, who says people far too often believe Cook was a conqueror, when really he was an explorer.

"Cook was a scientist. He was in charge of a scientific expedition. They were here to map things in the South Pacific, collect plants, that sort of thing - he wasn't coming to Australia to conquer," says Melleuish, who notes that one of the things they did on their voyage to Australia was to observe the astronomical phenomenon known as the transit of Venus.

"They were part of the new scientific world of the 18th century, and among the educated classes of England at the time, there was an increasing interest in that - even George III was in to clocks." Celebrated - or reviled, as the case may be - in Australia mainly for mapping eastern Australia, and proving that Australia and New Guinea were in fact two separate landmasses, Cook's journey celebrated the best Enlightenment values, which sought to erase distinctions of race and class.

When Cook and his men sailed from Plymouth on the journey that would take them to Australia, he received a series of "hints" from James Douglas, Earl of Morton and head of the Royal Society.

Douglas advised Cook "to exercise the utmost patience and forbearance with respect to the natives of the several lands where the ship may touch. To check the petulance of the sailors, and restrain the wanton use of fire arms. To have it still in view that shedding the blood of those people is a crime of the highest nature. They are human creatures, the work of the same -omnipotent author, equally under His care with the most polished -European; perhaps being less -offensive, more entitled to his favour … should they in a hostile manner oppose the landing and kill some men in the attempt, even this would hardly justify firing upon them until every other gentle -method had been tried." And while Cook's landing at Botany Bay wasn't as peaceful, there is ample evidence that Cook took these words to heart - even, in June 1770, meeting with local elders in what would become far north Queensland to negotiate, as best they could, over taking turtles from the reef to feed his men while repairing the Endeavour.

This humanity, and a love of the latest scientific equipment of his day, helped make Cook's success as a captain and navigator. In his later voyage of 1772-75, Cook would use a chronometer to determine his ship's longitude.

Determined to prevent scurvy, he experimented with every sort of fruit, vegetable or grass he could find and convince his crew to eat.

He was also a shrewd reader of his crew. One story has it that to get his reluctant men to try sauerkraut as a potential remedy against scurvy, he gave it social status by serving it only in the officers' mess.

Soon it was so popular on board it had to be rationed.

Turning of the tide So how is it that Cook's reputation has become so, to borrow a word from academia, problematic?

It's a problem Melleuish has puzzled over, but he suggests that things started to change around the 1988 Australian bicentennial, which was marked by protests and alternative histories.

"It all has to do with the Aboriginal question, and it's the same thing with the attacks on Australia Day," Melleuish says. "It's the argument about settlement versus invasion - that's another form it takes - which is all about the meaning of individual words." Add to this an Australian curriculum that is hazy on early Australian history and leaves many conflating Cook's expedition - which was entirely scientific in nature - with the First Fleet, and it's easy to see how people like Victoria's Dr van Diemen might get things confused.

"The point she may have been trying to make is that when the First Fleet turned up, so did smallpox. But Cook had nothing to do with that, and there is no evidence that he brought smallpox.

"A lot of people have a very hazy concept of Australian history and events," Melleuish says.

And, more broadly, people tend to forget that Australian exploration in the South Pacific was also driven by ongoing conflict in Europe between England and France, which was also exploring - as the existence of the Sydney suburb of La Perouse reminds us.

"Who knows, if Britain had been successful in the Americas, maybe they wouldn't have felt compelled to go to Australia," Melleuish speculates."But there was a constant war between Britain and France - the Seven Years War was really the first 'world war' - so whatever happened, one of those two powers would have been interested in this place."
---
AND THE WINNERS ARE … PHIL 'BUZZ' ROTHFIELD HANDS OUT HIS 2020 AWARDS SPORTSMAN OF THE YEAR NRL Commissioner Peter V'landys leads the world of sport in the way he guides rugby league through the COVID-19 pandemic. His performance is the equal of scoring three tries and kicking six goals in a grand final as he saves the code from financial ruin.

SPORTSWOMEN OF THE YEAR Australia's incredible women's cricket team defeats India by 85 runs to win the T20 World Cup in front of 86,174 fans at the MCG. And then COVID-19 turns the sporting world on its head.

SADDEST DAY Dean Jones' death in India left us all in shock. It is a sad moment for all fans who grew to love cricket because of Deano.

TOUGHEST CALL Ray "Rabbits" Warren is 77 and has been talking about hanging up the microphone at Channel 9. Rabs has provided the soundtrack for so many great rugby league moments and memories. A true legend.

BEST CELEBRATION Katy Perry performs after the T20 final, with the Aussie women dancing on stage with her.

DONALD TRUMP AWARD FOR NOT KNOWING WHEN TO QUIT Storm captain and Immortal-in-waiting Cameron Smith. I said I'd never tell a champion when to quit, but Harry Grant did it for me in Origin III. The Storm could not keep Smith for one year only to lose Harry for a decade.

FOOD FIGHT South Sydney coach Wayne Bennett breaks NRL protocols when he has lunch at Grappa Restaurant with his partner. Having to miss two games to self-quarantine is his just desserts...

SEX, DRUGS AND ROCK AND TROLL Anthony Seibold deserves criticism for the way his Broncos played, but the savage social media attacks on his family and Anthony shines a light on the ugliest side of sport and society.

FINE LINE BETWEEN KEVIN AND HELL Kevvie Walters' appointment as coach should bring the passion back to Brisbane, so NSW fans should enjoy the Broncos' fall because it may not last long.

DAZE OF OUR LIVES Roosters and NSW skipper Boyd Cordner creates a headache for his club and the game with repeated concussions. He's such a courageous player and needs to be protected from himself.

WORST TEAM SELECTION Benny Elias slams your columnist for pointing out Freddy Fittler and Greg Alexander stuffed up the Blues bench for the deciding Origin game by not picking Ryan Papenhuyzen. Freddy later admits in a review he picked the wrong team. Thank you Benjamin!

TIK-TOK-KABOOM Nathan Cleary's dance video during the COVID break probably costs him the Dally M Medal with his two-game ban. It is a misstep that leaves NRL headquarters ready to twist and shout.

SMOKING GUN AWARD Latrell Mitchell and Josh Addo-Carr foolishly breaking social distancing rules to blow off steam by firing rifles at Mitchell's farm - and filming it. Ah, footy players.

LOWEST ACT New South Sydney Rabbitohs forward Jai Arrow attacking an almost unconscious James Tedesco in Origin III at Suncorp Stadium. What a disgraceful thing to do.

LITTLE MASTER AWARD Clive Churchill was an undersized fullback who became an Immortal. How fitting is it that Melbourne's No.1 Ryan Papenhuyzen wins the award named in Clive's honour for his grand final effort.

THE HAND OF GOD World sport loses a giant with the death of soccer icon Diego Maradona, aged 60. He lived a life of excess off the pitch, but was a genius on it. How good was he? He made his debut for Argentina at 16! Enough said.

MOMENT OF THE YEAR Canberra prop Josh Papalii's 60m chase and ankle tap on Titans halfback Jamal Fogarty was not only the best play of 2020, but one of the greatest front-row efforts this old journo has seen.

MARY, MARY QUITE CONTRARY Paul McGregor is one of the true gentlemen of rugby league and it was tough to see him sacked as St George Illawarra coach. It was a decision the big Red V had to make, but in football some people don't get what they deserve.

DOPE OF THE YEAR I Cronulla young gun Bronson Xerri testing positive to performance-enhancing drugs. This kid could have been anything.

DOPE OF THE YEAR II It's even harder to forgive Parramatta veteran Michael Jennings, who missed the Eels' sudden-death semi against Souths when told on the day of the game he had returned a positive drugs test. There are no excuses.

BEST ENDURANCE My old mate Phil Gould almost lasted a full season on Twitter without shutting his account - but fell at the last hurdle, pulling the plug in November. But he was back online in time for Christmas.

HOLDING A GRUDGE AWARD Souths' record-breaking 60-8 demolition of arch-enemy the Roosters. Can't wait until they meet again in 2021.

SEX AND OUT Bulldogs pair Jayden Okunbor and Corey Harawira-Naera are sacked after a sex scandal at Port Macquarie. Okunbor is eventually reinstated by the Dogs and Harawira-Naera is picked up by Canberra.

FAST FEUDS I Revelations emerged on the eve of the finals that Canberra's Ricky Stuart and the Roosters' Trent Robinson are playing "no-speakies". It's a fun game.

FAST FEUDS II There remains no love lost between former Broncos coach and Souths mentor Wayne Bennett and former Souths coach and deposed Broncos mentor Anthony Seibold.

BREAKING BUD It's time to ask if Buddy Franklin's nine-year, $10 million contract has been worth it. No premierships, he's hardly played in two seasons (didn't play at all in 2020) and the Swans are mired in mediocrity.

TEAM OF THE YEAR Penrith's bittersweet 17-game winning streak is one of the big stories of the sporting season, but it ends on grand final day. Despite that heartbreak, I can't go past them as the year's top sporting team in any code.

BOMBSHELL OF THE YEAR Allegations of domestic violence and drug use surrounding South Sydney icon Sam Burgess will have major ramifications for the code and Rabbits if proven, but he deserves his day in court.

RED FLAG AWARD Aussie touch judge Angus Gardner makes the blunder of the Year when he misses All Blacks winger Reiko Ioane stepping on the touchline in the lead-up to the All Blacks' opening try in the 16-16 draw at Eden Park. Do I hear "bunker", anyone?

SIMPLY THE BREAST AWARD Sydney FC's Rhyan Grant (below) is the hero of the Sky Blues' grand final win against Melbourne City, scoring with his "nipple", as Fox's Andy Harper so succinctly put, in the 10th minute of extra time.

SOFT SERVE Is it any wonder rugby is struggling? Watching Wallabies rookie Lachie Swinton and All Blacks prop Ofa Tu'ungafasi get sent off for tackles that would have barely knocked the dandruff of their opponents should is ridiculous. It is a Bledisloe Test, not the local under-8s. At least the Wallabies win, 24-22.

2 GUYS, A GIRL & A PIZZA PLACE Some blokes never learn. Manly's Dylan Walker getting himself in trouble seems to be a recurring theme of off-seasons. This time he's arrested for allegedly assaulting two men outside a pizza place and jumping into the car of a woman he doesn't know.

BUY OF THE YEAR Api Koroisau's return to Penrith from Manly couldn't have gone any better. The little hooker makes all the difference to Ivan Cleary's team.

THE MEATLOAF AWARD Forget two out of three, jockey Kerrin McEvoy's effort to win this third TAB Everest crown in just four runnings of the great sprint is a mighty effort. Classique Legend's win followed McEvoy's double on Redzel in 2017 and 2018.

THE BETTER HALF Benji Marshall is still without a club after being shown the door by the Wests Tigers despite having a better season than Luke Brooks and Josh Reynolds.

POOR DIDDUMS AWARD High-paid Tigers pair Josh Reynolds and Russell Packer leave Brookvale at halftime and miss their team's stunning comeback win against Manly. Their reason - they were cold.

LAWN SERVICE Tigers prop Josh Aloaia wants to break his contract to join Manly. Tigers chairman Lee Hagipantelis says Aloia isn't leaving and can mow the grounds at Leichhardt and Campbelltown. Someone's getting their grass cut here.

SPLITTING HAIRS AWARD Tevita Pangai Jnr's hardly been a team player at the Broncos, but rather than sack the big forward for a wilful breach of bio-security rules, Brisbane fine him $30,000 and stand him down for the season. If you want a glimpse of the Broncos' issues, it's right there.

THE GLITTER STRIP 20-year-old David Fifita's $3.5 million defection to the Gold Titans brings extra spotlight and pressure on one of the best young talents in the game. It's finals or bust now on the Gold Coast.

WHOLE NEW BRAWL GAME Rugby league turns into a boxing match at the Tribal League competition. Walgett Aboriginal Connection's Tyronne Roberts-Davis and Newcastle Hawks' Randall Briggs stand toe-to-toe throwing haymakers. That's why the punching ban is needed.

DOG FINDS HIS WAY HOME I am delighted Kieran Foran will get to finish his career at Manly alongside Daly Cherry-Evans. They were a great pairing and Foran showed enough at the Dogs to suggest he'll be an asset.

OLD SCHOOL Youngsters Payne Haas (NSW) and Tino Fa'asuamaleaui (Queensland) bring their schoolboy rivalry to the Origin stage with an old-fashioned punch-up.

MERRY EX-MAS The Roosters give young gun half Kyle Flanagan an early "Christmas bonus" by flicking him to the Bulldogs. The Tricolours' ruthless response to a straight-sets finals exit? Sack the kid.

CRUEL TWIST Roosters' hopes of a hat-trick of titles effectively ends as Victor Radley and Sam Verrills tear their ACLs within minutes of each other versus the Dragons.

ONE-FINGER SALUTE Cam Smith breaks the try-scoring tally (46) of his coach Craig Bellamy against the Tigers. Bellamy's response is to give his skipper the bird.

TWILIGHT ZONE I never thought we'd see it again, but Twilight Payment leads from go-to-whoa, giving owner Lloyd Williams his seventh Cup triumph. It's a brilliant run.

ALL BETS ARE OFF Tabcorp issues apology after a glitch prevents punters from wagering on the Melbourne Cup carnival final day. Oops.

PHANTOM PUNCH Mark Hunt going after Paul Gallen at the weigh-in for their heavyweight fight. Stunt anyone? Wouldn't have knocked your old columnist over.

BEST MARKETING The Sonny Bill Williams comeback at the Roosters. Only a shadow of the superstar player he once was but added enormous interest in his five-game stint.

GREATEST OFF-FIELD PERFORMANCE The Warriors' approach to COVID-19 and decision to stay in Australia is a credit to coaches Stephen Kearney (axed) and Todd Payten, captain Roger Tuivasa-Sheck and the rest of the club. It should never be forgotten

CLINT EASTWOOD: COMEDIAN Has someone been writing Grand Torino Wayne Bennett some new one-liners - "maybe should we drug test journalists" … "I'm too old for schoolies". We even saw him smiling in the coaches' box. Know your role, Wayne.

SUCKER PUNCH The people who bought the Mike Tyson-Roy Jones Jr golden oldies fight. Two 50-plus seniors huffing and puffing for a contrived draw now joins UFC on this column's banned list.

X-RATED AWARD Manly's Addin Fonua-Blake's foul-mouthed rant at referee Grant Atkins after the loss to Newcastle is not on. The two-match ban is too light.

INDIVIDUAL TRY OF THE YEAR Brisbane centre Kotoni Staggs pushes off Dragons opposite Euan Aitken and burns fullback Matt Dufty in an explosive 60-metre run.

TEAM TRY OF THE YEAR Warriors half Chanel Harris-Tavita handles three times in a movement against Parramatta that goes to both touchlines and features two kicks.

HIT OF THE YEAR I Bulldogs winger Dallin Watene-Zelezniak comes and hits Sharks playmaker Matt Moylan with a classic bellringer.

HIT OF THE YEAR II Eels winger Maika Sivo proves you can be just as brutal with the ball when he uses Roosters superstar fullback James Tedesco as a speed bump to score.

GOOD-TIME CHARLIE Panthers winger Charlie Staines (left) scores four tries on debut, becoming only the sixth player in history to achieve the feat. A few days later he is stood down for breaking COVID-19 restrictions by hosting a party at home.

AN INCONVENIENT TOOTH Gold Coast skipper Kevin Proctor is found guilty of biting Sharks star and Kiwis teammate Shaun Johnson. Suspended for four games.

NO RINGS ATTACHED For proof of what a strange year it has been, having the Olympic Games suspended due to COVID underlines it in red felt pen. Previously, only World Wars have paused the Olympics.

BOOK OF FEUDS: CHAPTER 7986 The Roosters sneak under Souths' guard to sign teen freak Joseph Suaalii for 2022. Souths initially refuse to release him to their arch-rivals but eventually back off. No point keeping a kid who doesn't want to be there.

NO KID GLOVES Tim Tszyu showed he is much more than Kostya's boy when dissecting former world champion Jeff Horn. There has to be a world title fight in his near future.

SOUR GRAPES Josh Addo-Carr should have been awarded a penalty try in the dying moments of Origin III when taken out by Maroons fullback Corey Allan. There, I said it.

MUNSTER'S BALL I can't believe I'm writing this, but Cameron Munster's performance in Origin III rivals anything I have seen from a Queensland No.6 - and that includes King Wally and Johnathan Thurston.

WE'RE ALL WILD ABOUT HARRY If we're raving about Munster, we should be equally effusive about hooker Harry Grant. His debut rivals any Queensland performance since … well, Munster in 2017.

MAN OF THE CENTURY What about Steve Smith? A 61-ball ton and a 62-ball hundred to start the international cricket summer.

WORST TIPSTER Yes, I admit. I told Ben Ikin on Fox that NSW would win the Origin series 3-0. You'd think an old bloke like me would know better than to write off those Cane Toads - until next year, of course.

JAW-DROPPING MOMENT Paul Gallen took bombs from former UFC warrior Mark Hunt to stay undefeated in the boxing ring in a thrilling night at Bankwest Stadium. What a tough fight.

HEARTFELT SALUTE 2020 has been a year like no other, especially for all the dedicated sportsmen and women who couldn't get into the arenas or on the fields. We hope Australians are back out there doing us proud in front of big crowds again in 2021.

DEAL OR NO DEAL Panthers' rising superstar Stephen Crichton backflips on a commitment to sign a long-term deal with the club to explore his options elsewhere. Watch the chequebooks come out now.

FEELING DUSTY I would love to see Dustin Martin play rugby league. What an athlete. His grand final performance to win a third Norm Smith Medal was one of the great sporting performances.

THOSE WHO WON'T EXCHANGE XMAS CARDS Wayne Bennett .......................Anthony Seibold David Gallop............................. Cameron Smith Todd Greenberg......................... Peter V'landys Payne Haas........................Tino Fa'asuamaleaui Trent Robinson ...............................Ricky Stuart Bulldog Ritchie........... the state of Queensland Jai Arrow....................................James Tedesco James Warburton....................Cricket Australia John Morris.................................. Andrew Fifita Dean Lonergan...................................Matt Rose Josh Reynolds............................your columnist Justin Pascoe.....................................Josh Aloiai Sam Burgess...................................Mitch Hooke Steve Waugh.................................Shane Warne Mitchell Johnson..............................Ben Stokes Blake Solly.............................Shane Richardson Mack Horton........................................Sun Yang Jared Waerea-Hargreaves....Jack Hetherington John Hopoate ...........................................Manly Gorden Tallis.................................... Matt Lodge Addin Fonua-Blake ........................Grant Atkins
---
SMARTliving EMPLOYMENT HOW TO ENSURE THERE'S NO BIAS WHETHER YOU'RE THE APPLICANT OR THE EMPLOYER UNCONSCIOUS bias has long been an issue in hiring processes, with promising candidates ending up in the "no" pile based on assumptions and snap judgments.

While it is the employer's responsibility to avoid unlawful discrimination, jobseekers can also help protect themselves by strategically deciding what they do or do not include in their resume or interview.

The Fair Work Ombudsman defines unlawful workplace discrimination as occurring when an employer takes adverse action - such as not hiring someone - on the basis of race, colour, sex, sexual orientation, age, physical or mental disability, marital status, family or carer's responsibilities, pregnancy, religion, political opinion, national extraction or social origin.

Although most businesses have diversity and inclusion policies in place to avoid conscious discrimination, unconscious bias is more difficult to stamp out.

An Australian study published in Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics in 2010 found job applicants from minority backgrounds were less likely to reach the interview stage.

Researchers sent out 4000 fake resumes and found those with Anglo-Saxon-sounding names had a 35 per cent call-back rate compared to 32 per cent for Italian-sounding names, 26 per cent for Indigenous Australian-sounding names, 22 per cent for Middle Eastern-sounding names and 21 per cent for Chinese-sounding names.

When it comes to gender bias, business consultant and workplace trainer Amanda Rose says it can sometimes work in a woman's favour to avoid mention of any husband or children in the application process.

Some hiring managers assume a woman will not dedicate as much time to the role if she has a family.

"I sometimes do recommend not wearing a wedding ring to a job interview," she says.

"It's a personal choice, however I always did that (and) I know plenty of people who have done that for leadership roles." Bias is not just an issue among human recruiters, either.

It can also creep into hiring processes that use artificial intelligence. Three years ago, Amazon was forced to scrap its automated hiring tool after realising the AI was favouring male applicants.

The algorithm had been trained on past resume patterns but as the tech industry was heavily male dominated, it was essentially screening women out.

PredictiveHire co-founder and chief executive Barb Hyman says it is really important that businesses understand what they are buying when they use HR technology with AI.

"To quote Spider-Man, 'with great power comes great responsibility'," she says. "You need to put the controls in ahead of time." Hyman's company has created a chat bot that aims to remove all bias in the hiring process.

Rather than asking applicants for a resume, which will include personal details, it asks a series of questions that are purely relevant to the job.

"If the employer doesn't know you are a female or white or if you come from a different background, there is no room for bias so everyone gets a fair go," she says.

"(The companies that use PredictiveHire) are indifferent to whether you are beautiful or young - they want their talent as diverse as the community they represent.

"Bunnings, for example, is passionate about hiring more than their fair share of Indigenous talent and research shows people are biased against Aboriginal people.

"They have doubled their rate of hiring of Indigenous people since having a tool that they are comfortable with." Hyman says many hirers have embraced video interviews since the COVID-19 outbreak but a lot of people did not present their best self on that platform.

"Unless you are attractive and extroverted, it might not work for you," she says.

"Video in particular disadvantages people from a low socio-economic background because if they are sitting in a trailer (for their interview) you can see they are disadvantaged.

"(Video and face-to-face) interviewing is preferring people who are savvy at selling themselves."

Protect yourself from hiring bias DON'T indicate your gender or any information about physical abilities on your resume DON'T include your date of birth or use an email address that provides this information (eg gsmith1962@email.com) DON'T list graduation dates for qualifications if you believe your age might work against you DON'T provide your residential address if it might symbolise socio-economic status DON'T give the names of schools, colleges or universities attended unless you believe those details will work in your favour DON'T include details of any religious or political affiliations, or your relationship status DO restrict access to your personal social media accounts to prevent a prospective employer accessing information about your political affiliations, interests and your own biases DO audit your LinkedIn profile to determine exactly what personal information is on offer to the public DO seek out employers who support anonymous hiring processes. These companies omit all personal details including names in an attempt to provide a level playing field for all applicants.

DO stay focused on your skills and knowledge during a job interview DO resist the temptation of offering details about family, partners or broad interests outside the professional arena SOURCE: Australian Institute of Management workplace specialist Emeritus Professor Gary Martin (above)
---
PENRITH star Nathan Cleary admitted yesterday he "messed up" by dancing with a group of young women inside his home and disobeying social distancing protocols, but said he did not tell the NRL about the existence of videos because "they didn't ask me about them".

Police will not take action against the Panthers halfback because the incident took place inside his own home, but the 22-year-old is bracing for heftier fines from the NRL after the emergence of two TikTok videos of him dancing with the women.

Cleary told The Daily Telegraph yesterday he regretted filming the two now-deleted videos with the women in the sitting room of his Penrith home.

He earlier told the league's integrity unit he was unaware photographs had been taken of him during an uninvited, impromptu stop-in on Anzac Day which landed him a $4000 NRL-imposed fine.

"I messed up. I spoke to the integrity unit about what happened but they didn't ask me about the TikTok videos, they just asked me about the pictures and I've already told them about that," Cleary said yesterday afternoon through the crack of his front door.

"I wish I hadn't done the video, just got carried away in the moment. I was stupid. I messed up." "I'm just finding the whole social distancing and isolation stuff too much. "It's not something anyone has ever gone through before. It's difficult. "I regret doing the video.

"If they fine me more I'll deal with that at the time.

"I'm just going to wait and see what happens when I speak to the integrity unit." After being shown the two videos yesterday morning, the game's governing body said it would review the footage. However, Cleary has been cleared by police because, as the occupier of the home, he was not deemed to have broken COVID-19 rules.

The women who visited the home Cleary shares with fellow Penrith player Tyrone May could face fines of $1000.

While fellow NRL stars Latrell Mitchell and Josh Addo Carr were each fined $20,000 ($50,000 with 60 per cent suspended) and issued with a one-game suspended sentence for their social distancing breaches, Cleary was hit with only a $4000 punishment ($10,000 with 60 per cent suspended) and a one-game suspended ban.

In explaining the large discrepancy between the punishments on Tuesday, acting NRL CEO Andrew Abdo (pictured right) said it was deemed Cleary's interaction with the women was unexpected, as opposed to the planned camping trip embarked on by Mitchell and Addo-Carr.

In regards to photographs that emerged on Tuesday showing Cleary sitting on the lounge as the women sat on his lap, the Panthers star said "in the time they were here there was a photo that was taken that I had no idea about until this morning".

However, these videos clearly show Cleary partici-pating in TikTok posts for the popular social media platform.

On Tuesday, Cleary said he was sorry and "stuffed up".

"My sister's friends and girls I have grown up with were drinking down the road on the street," he told Nine News.

"They came by and popped in and said they were just waiting for an Uber before they went to someone else's house." He said the girls would have been drinking in his home for about 10 minutes. The NSW Origin star sent his teammates an apology and had to tell his coach and father Ivan Cleary.

"I explained the situation to him and he said you shouldn't have done that," he told Nine News.

"It was very hard, I had a sick feeling in my stomach the whole time. "Not only is he my coach but my dad at the same time." ARL Commission chairman Peter V'landys declared on Tuesday that the breaches by the stars would serve as a "final warning" to all other NRL players about strictly following the COVID-10 guidelines and in terms of punishments "the next one will be harsher".

"We've given them the benefit of the doubt in this instance. Out of every negative is a positive and the positive here is that every player is on notice," V'landys said.

"Their actions are extremely important during this pandemic crisis." Nine commentator and former Penrith football boss Phil Gould has called on Addo-Carr, Mitchell and Cleary to be banned for the remainder of the NRL season.

Only a day after declaring Mitchell and Addo-Carr should be outed for the rest of the year after breaking the COVID-19 regulations, Gould suggested the same should now happen to Cleary - the playmaker he helped bring into both the NRL and NSW Origin side.

Gould took to Twitter on Monday to write: "No excuse. Serious breach. Granted Nathan says the incident was not planned, which obviously differs from the Josh/Latrell situation. However, players need to be vigilant. They need to protect themselves, their teammates, and the game. For mine, blanket penalties should apply."Asked if Cleary should also be banned for a year, Gould replied: "Absolutely. It's irresponsible."
---
JAKE Trbojevic says younger brother Tom will be ready to go for the opening round of the NRL season after developing a new training regimen for his troublesome hamstrings.

Considered crucial to Manly's hopes of success, Tom Trbojevic and his dodgy hammies are set to be among the hottest topics of any countdown to the 2021 NRL season.

In the past two years, the Manly fullback has been restricted to just 19 games. Now back in training on the northern beaches, both brothers have been busy in the lead up to their Christmas break - for different reasons.

While Tom flew to Melbourne for further testing on his hamstrings a few weeks back, Jake has been attending fundraisers and helping promote Gotcha4Life, the mental fitness charity founded by Gus Worland.

Along with fellow NSW Origin star James Tedesco, the high-profile ambassadors are planning to get more hands-on with school visits and talks in the new year as restrictions around the NRL bubble are set to be eased.

While Jake is still on a break after an arduous State of Origin campaign, Tom is looking to regain the form that first earned him a Blues start thanks to a new pre-season program involving input from Melbourne specialists.

After a third hamstring tear against Canberra Raiders in May, both Trbojevic and recruit Kieran Foran were sent to Melbourne a few weeks ago for further testing.

Asked how the trip had gone, Jake said the testing had shown everything was "great" while adding specialists had also provided new training methods for the fullback to trial.

"Tommy will be good for the first game," the Sea Eagles backrower said. "And he's been working extremely hard to get himself right. I know the past couple of years have been frustrating. Especially given how hard he works to stay out there on the field.

"But the testing says it's all great. Even recently, he went to Melbourne and saw some specialists to get further testing done.

"And they've given him some new training methods and different things. "So, despite having had some bad luck, he's young; still only 24. "Tom has a long time left in the NRL. He just needs a little good fortune now. That's what everyone wants to see." Already well known for his community work, Trbojevic has joined Tedesco as an ambassador for Gotcha4Life.

The Sea Eagles favourite, who is close mates with Worland, said he was keen to be involved with the charity, pointing to new research revealing one in 10 Australians have contemplated suicide due to COVID-19's impact on their mental wellbeing.

"During the lockdown, a lot of people really felt like they were on their own," Trbojevic said. "So, the key message is making sure people aren't worrying alone. We want people to look after each other. Have deeper relationships.

"And, yes, that can be a little awkward at times. But it's so important to have those deeper conversations with people who might need to be helped out. "The statistics show it's a big problem within the community and I'm happy to come on board and do whatever I can to assist."
---
Arthur scoffs at 'asterisk' title claims and warns ...

BRAD Arthur has shot down suggestions this year's NRL champions will have an asterisk beside their name in the record books.

Instead, Arthur reckons this season will be a "real ironman test" in which teams will play 18 straight rounds without a bye or State of Origin disrupting the ultimate survival of the fittest.

In a huge boost for the Eels, Arthur also said hooker Reed Mahoney would be fit to return from his broken foot in the comeback game against Brisbane.

However, Arthur is reluctant to move Ryan Matterson from an edge to cover the suspension of lock Nathan Brown.

There has been huge debate about the controversial changes that have been implemented because of COVID-19, ranging from the shortened regular season to playing Origin at the end of the year, as well the fact there will now be one referee and a six-again interpretation.

While some believe the changes devalue the competition, Arthur argued it could make it even tougher.

"It is a real ironman test for me because you are going to have to play 18 weeks straight," Arthur said.

"That is unseen in our competition, and then you go into finals. You usually have a couple of byes and rep rounds (to break up the season).

"I know other guys have to play rep footy but they usually get looked after a bit by their clubs.

"So management of your players is going to be really important. Having everyone in your squad ready is probably another important factor.

"But if you ask the players, there is no way in the world that any of them would (say the competition has been -devalued).

"They all work so hard. It is hard enough to win one game of NRL, let alone a whole competition.

"You ask the players and you ask the team at the end of the year that does end up winning it if it doesn't mean anything to them." Parramatta showed in the first two rounds before the shutdown that they are going to be up with the competition heavyweights but the trick now is going to be adapting to the changes.

Arthur has an idea about how his team will respond but can't be certain until the changes are tested under match-day pressure.

The six-again interpretation will likely suit eyes-up players like Clint Gutherson and Mitchell Moses, who really have a knack of taking advantage of tired defenders.

But Arthur said every team would have players capable of making the most of the changes.

He said the Eels planned to trial their techniques at a training run tomorrow but because of the "bubble" restrictions in place around all NRL teams (where no outsiders are allowed in), they couldn't get a qualified referee to take charge of the session.

Mahoney will be ready to play the Broncos but Arthur did not reveal who would take Brown's place at lock. He did say Matterson was an unlikely option because Arthur wants him to stay on Moses' edge, meaning the likes of Kane Evans, Peni Terepo, Marata Niukore and Oregon Kaufusi are all fighting for the starting spot.
---
HARBOUR OPERATION IN the largest peacetime maritime operation ever undertaken on Sydney Harbour, police and port officials began yesterday to move 1300 crew members between five stricken cruise liners.

The ships and government have been in a stalemate after the vessels were banned from docking due to the COVID-19 outbreak. Five Royal Carribean cruise liners were involved.

The ships were refuelled and restocked with food and medical supplies before they left.

Crew members are also being allowed to move onto ships heading closest to their countries of origin.

"More than 600 crew members, who are foreign nationals, were moved between the two ships in numerous tender operations, before both ships departed NSW waters to return to their home countries," a spokesman said. Another three ships with 780 crew will be moved today.Ovation of the Seas has been linked to 84 cases of COVID-19 among passengers, while 39 cases, including five crew, were aboard Voyager of the Seas. Another 12 passengers from Celebrity Solstice have tested positive. The Ruby Princess, last night in the Tasman Sea off Sydney, has more than 1000 crew being checked.
---
1990 NSWRL introduces a salary cap ranging from $800,000 to $1.5m, depending on individual club circumstances.

1991 Salary cap increased to $1.6m.

1994 Salary cap increased to $1.8m.

1997 Super League war. Salary cap abandoned.

1998 NRL formed and sets salary cap at $3.25m for 1999. Cap acknowledges "notional values" of players from contracts signed during the Super League war.

2001 Salary cap increases to $3.325m due to the introduction of the "Sponsor Servicing Allowance".

2001 Salary cap increases to $3.347m.

2002 Salary cap increases to $3.45m.

2003 Salary cap increases to $3.55m as NRL introduces $100,000 Long Serving Player Allowance for players with 10 years of consecutive first grade service.

2005 Salary cap increases to $3.6 million (including Long-Serving Player Allowance and Sponsor Servicing Allowance).

2007 Salary cap increases to $3.9m with $55,000 minimum wage for top 17 players and $52,500 for top 25 players - up from $50,000.

2008 Salary cap increases to $4m 2012 Salary cap increases to $4.4m.

2013Salary cap increases to $5.15m, raising minimum wage to $75,000. Origin payments increase to $30,000 per game, Test match payments $20,000 2014 Salary cap increases to $5.5m 2015 Salary cap increases to $5.8m, raising minimum wage to $80,000 2016 Salary cap rises to $6.1m 2018 Salary cap increases to $9.1m and NRL top squad increases from 25 players to 30. Minimum wage increased to $100,000 for players 1-26, and $70,000 for players 27-30 2020 Salary cap increases to $9.5m Pre-COVID-19 projection 2022 Salary cap increases to $9.7m
---
1. Mistakes will be made when -people are under pressure, but -allowing 48 Jetstar passengers to leave Sydney airport after arriving from Melbourne without screening is -unforgivable. Now three of the 48 passengers who have been contacted are refusing to be tested. What sort of -insanity are we dealing with here?

2. The NSW Government should have closed the borders with Victoria last Friday, not this week. It was troubling to watch the Premier Gladys Berejiklian deeply concerned at a media conference on Wednesday. She holds grave fears NSW might pay a penalty for Victoria's stupidity, and rightly so.

3. There are still those in Australia who claim the virus is nothing more than a bad dose of the flu. Annually 350,000 to 600,000 people die due to the flu across the world. About one billion people globally contract the flu, despite there being a vaccine. In six months we've had over 12 million COVID-19 cases and more than 550,000 deaths and there's no vaccine. If one billion people get the virus we'll have tens of millions of deaths. That's a bit more serious than a dose of the flu.

4. The NSW government has backflipped on moving the Powerhouse Museum to Parramatta. It's now decided to keep one at Ultimo and build a new one at Parramatta. That's good, except the chosen site at Parramatta will see two magnificent heritage-listed buildings torn down. Premier, please find another site in the west.

5. How the DPP withdrew the case against returned Minister Don Harwin over his breach of the lockdown has many baffled, including Police Commissioner Mick -Fuller, who said he stood by his decision to confirm the infringement -notice. Equally perplexed are some senior ministers in the government who couldn't quite believe the -Premier's haste to reinstate the hapless Harwin.

6. I can't understand the comments of District Court Judge Robyn Tupman who, in sentencing a man to jail for sexual assault, said he wasn't a paedophile because he thought his 12-year-old victim was older. Well, -unfortunately in reality Fouad "Fred" Hasna is a paedophile given the victim of his vile sexual assault was a 12-year-old boy.

7. Federal Finance Minister Math-ias Cormann will be sadly missed when he retires in December. He's been an outstanding member of the government and we owe him a great debt of gratitude for tapping Malcolm Turnbull on shoulder and telling him "it's time".

8. Addin Fonua Blake and Manly need to stop making excuses. Their skipper Daly Cherry-Evans -entered the debate late in the week when he should have pulled his head in. Addin needs to take ownership of what he said both on the field and off the field with no excuses, cop his -punishment and move on.

9. The transcripts of text messages sent by jockey Adam Hyeronimus appear to be quite damning. Racing NSW stewards are considering whether or not they should take -drastic action over his alleged betting activities. 10. It's been 40 years since State of Origin started and I've been fortunate enough to have called 80 of those matches. The stand-out is still the Mark Coyne try at the Sydney Football Stadium in 1994.
---
UNFAIR DEAL BEIJING officials gave no warning before slapping an import- ban on four Australian meat processors now stuck in limbo for months amid escalating tensions over China's handling of the pandemic.

The operators were blindsided to learn China had suspended their licences to export with immediate effect yesterday, due to technical labelling and certification issues dating back more than a year.

The sudden trade block came just weeks after a warning from the Chinese ambassador to Australia that exports including red meat, wine and education would be targeted if the Morrison government did not end its call for an independent inquiry into the origins of COVID-19.

Chinese newspaper the Global Times foreshadowed "economic repercussions" in an editorial published before the licence suspension that accused Australia of "joining in on the China blame game".

The ban also followed China's announcement on Sunday it planned to introduce an 80 per cent tariff on Australian barley, which would cripple the industry.

The suspended meat processors, NSW Northern Co-operative Meat Company (NCMC), and three Queensland meatworks - Pastoral Company, Beef City and Dinmore - are working with the federal government to resolve issues so they can re-enter the Chinese market.

But NCMC chief executive Simon Stahl said it could be two months before the company can resume exports to China, which accounts for 10 per cent of its business.

The Casino-based company employs 900 people and exports red meat to 26 nations. Mr Stahl said he received a call from his Shanghai office late on Monday afternoon to say there were "murmurings in the market" about problems.

NCMC only learned of the suspension from the Australian Meat Industry Council. Mr Stahl said NCMC would work through the concerns via the Department of Agriculture, and "didn't want to read between the lines" as to whether politics was behind the ban. "I will stay out of that," he said.

Total NSW beef exports to China were worth $736 million last year. Trade Minister Simon Birmingham said it was "disappointing" China did not notify Australia before the suspension- came into effect.

"The reason given for this suspension relates to instances dating back over more than a year of minor technical errors in relation to labelling or other technical requirements," he said. "My expectation is the technical issues, we will find have all been addressed." Chinese foreign ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian last night blamed the ban on quarantine and inspection failures.

"Chinese customs has continuously found that multiple batches of beef products exported to China by individual Australian companies have violated the inspection and quarantine requirements," he said.But he called Australia's demand for a coronavirus inquiry "erroneous words and deeds" and warned against "using the epidemic to engage in political manipulation".
---
THE CHINESE EMBASSY HAS VOICED ITS DISPLEASURE WITH THE TELEGRAPH'S CORONAVIRUS COVERAGE. HERE TIM BLAIR RESPONDS TO THE CONCERNS

THE Daily Telegraph this week received a letter from the Australian Consulate General of the People's Republic of China, who took gentle issue with our excellent coverage of the coronavirus crisis.

Following is a point-by-point response to the Consulate General and China's communist dictatorship.

"Recently The Daily Telegraph has published a number of reports and opinions about China's response to COVID-19 that are full of ignorance, prejudice and arrogance." If a state-owned newspaper in China received this kind of complaint, subsequent days would involve journalists waking up in prison with their organs harvested.

"Tracing the origin of the virus is a scientific issue that requires professional, science-based assessment." Sure it does. How professional and science-based was the claim published on March 12 by China's foreign ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian that "it might be US Army who brought the epidemic to Wuhan"?

"The origin of the virus is still undetermined, and the World Health Organisation has named the novel coronavirus 'COVID-19'." The World Health Organisation also appointed Zimbabwean murderer Robert Mugabe as its Goodwill Ambassador, and declared on March 2 that the "stigma" of the coronavirus "is more dangerous than the virus itself". The World Health Organisation does a lot of stupid stuff.

"So what is the real motive behind your attempt to repeatedly link the virus to China and even stating that the novel coronavirus was 'made in China'?" Our motive is accuracy. That's why we don't link the virus to Bognor Regis or say it was "made in Panama".

"The people of Wuhan made a huge effort and personal sacrifice to stop the spread of the epidemic." Wuhan's Dr Li Wenliang indeed made a huge effort to warn people about the coronavirus outbreak. Then, as The New York Times reports: "In early January, he was called in by both medical officials and the police, and forced to sign a statement denouncing his warning as an unfounded and illegal rumor." And now he's dead, so that's "personal sacrifice" covered as well.

"Nevertheless … to capture attention and gain more internet hits, you called Wuhan the 'Zombieland' and Wuhan seafood market the 'bat market'. How low can you go?" In the civilised world, "Bradman bats and bats and bats" is a famous newspaper banner. In Wuhan, it's the name of a restaurant.

"The effectiveness of China's epidemic prevention and control has fully underlined the people-centred philosophy of the Communist Party of China and the strong advantages of the Chinese system." In 2018, Amnesty International reported that China executed more citizens than the rest of the world combined. Please tell us more about your "people-centred philosophy" and how many bullets it requires.

"Instead of admitting and facing facts, the articles in your newspaper have wantonly attacked and smeared the CPC and the Chinese government with vicious language." And yet we haven't been executed! Where's the justice in that? "Is your judgment based on the wellbeing of the people or do you have an ideological prejudice?" We will admit to an ideological prejudice against deadly tyranny. It's a tragic failing on our part.

"Since 3 January, China has been updating the WHO and the international community in a timely and transparent manner." On January 14, following 11 days of "timely and transparent" updates, the WHO broadcast this ridiculous Chinese misinformation: "Preliminary investigations conducted by the Chinese authorities have found no clear evidence of human-to-human transmission of the novel coronavirus." "The epidemic is spreading rapidly around the globe, and China is doing its utmost to support other severely affected countries." Thousands of Chinese-made coronavirus testing kits and medical masks exported to Spain, Turkey and the Netherlands turned out to be "below standard or defective", according to the BBC. And the ABC this week reported that more than 800,000 masks have been seized by Australian Border Force officers after being "found to be counterfeit or otherwise faulty". Thanks for all your help, guys.

"Virus respects no borders." Why, then, did China close its own borders on March 28 - even while claiming victory over the spread of coronavirus?

"You have repeatedly questioned the WHO's positive assessment of China's epidemic prevention and control, but surely you know that the WHO is the most authoritative international organisation in global public health, with more than 190 members including Australia?" Keep an eye on that number, sunshine.

"In disregard of the authoritative information provided by China and the WHO's professional opinions, you instead quoted several so-called 'strategic analysts' … were you aware that the institution where these people work have been exposed as long accepting financial support from the US government …?" The US last year contributed nearly $900 million to the holy WHO. Your point, sir?

"Your recent coverage on the epidemic in China are exaggerated, full of irresponsible rumours and highly politicised."Naughty us. Please send an official Dr Li Wenliang "unfounded and illegal rumour" denunciation statement so we can sign it and be on our way.
---
THE coronavirus that has become a worldwide pandemic may have been created in a "cell-culture experiment" in a laboratory, according to prominent scientists who have conducted groundbreaking research into the origins of the virus.

Flinders University -Professor Nikolai Petrovsky has completed a scientific study, currently undergoing peer review, in conjunction with Latrobe University in Victoria, which found COVID-19 was uniquely adapted for transmission to humans, far more than any other animal, including bats.

"It was like it was -designed to infect humans," he said.

Professor Petrovsky, from the College of Medicine and Public Health at Flinders University, who has spent the past 20 years developing vaccines against pandemic influenza, ebola and animal SARS, said this highly unusual finding left open the possibility that the virus leaked from a laboratory.

CONTINUES P8 CONTINUED FROM PAGE 1 "The two possibilities which I think are both still open is that it was a chance transmission of a virus from an as yet unidentified animal to human. The other possibility is that it was an accidental release of the virus from a laboratory," he said. "Certainly we can't exclude the possibility that this came from a laboratory experiment rather than from an animal. They are both open possibilities." Prof Petrovsky, who is chairman and research director of Vaccine Pty Ltd, said COVID-19 had genetic elements similar to bat coronaviruses as well as other coronaviruses.

The way coronavirus enters human cells is by binding to a protein on the surface of lung cells called ACE2. The study showed the virus bound more tightly to human-ACE2 than to any of the other animals they tested.

"One of the possibilities is that an animal host was infected by two coronaviruses at the same time and COVID-19 is the progeny of that -interaction between the two viruses.

"The same process can happen in a petri-dish. If you have cells in culture and you have human cells in that culture which the viruses are infecting, then if there are two viruses in that dish, they can swap genetic information and you can accidentally or deliberately create a whole third new virus out of that system.

"In other words COVID-19 could have been created from that recombination event in an animal host or it could have occurred in a cell-culture experiment." Scientists worldwide have, to date, overwhelmingly said the virus more likely originated in a wet-market and was not created in a laboratory.

Asked why scientists have had this view, Professor Petrovsky said scientists "try not to be political" and do not want their research impacted adversely by tighter laboratory controls.

Prof Petrovsky was originally modelling the virus in January to prepare a vaccine candidate. He then turned his attention to "explore what animal species might have been -involved in the transmission to humans" to understand the origins of the virus - and had a "surprising" -result when none were well-adapted.

"We found that the COVID-19 virus was particularly well-adapted to bind to human cells and that was far superior to its ability to bind to the cells of any other animal species, which is quite unusual because typically when a virus is well-adapted to an animal and then it by chance crosses to a human, typically, you would expect it to have lower-binding to human cells than to the original host animal.

"We found the opposite so that was a big surprise," he said. The study, a collaboration between Flinders University and Latrobe University, titled "In Silico comparison of spike protein-ACE2 binding affinities across species; significance for the possible origin of SARS-CoV-2 virus", is awaiting peer-review.
---
MARKETS Cautious optimism among experts

Leading fund managers and advisers to the nation's rich---listers are cautiously optimistic about the economic outlook for 2021, with value stocks exposed to the Australian housing market and local economy tipped to outperform.

After central banks rushed to slash interest rates across the world and $20 trillion in monetary and fiscal stimulus provided by governments globally in 2020, sharemarkets are expected to continue their upward trajectory in 2021.

The comments came as Australian shares ended a tumultuous year by almost wiping out the year's losses, while the Aussie dollar has surged back above US77c.

The S&P/ASX 200 closed on a weaker note on Thursday, finishing a shortened session down 1.43 per cent, or 95.3 points, at 6587.10. This took total losses for the calendar year to 1.45 per cent, but marked a stunning recovery from the global market shocks inflicted early in the year by the COVID-19 pandemic.

The benchmark ended down 8 per cent from its record closing high on February 20, but surged 45 per cent from its COVID-savaged low of just 4546 points on March 23.

Information technology was the biggest moving sector in the local market, up 57 per cent on the year, followed by materials - which covers the big miners of BHP, Rio Tinto and Fortescue - up 14.6 per cent. Banks and financials were down 7.5 per cent, while Energy - which covers oil and gas producers - was off 29 per cent.

The biggest mover in the S&P/ASX 200 was buy now, pay later juggernaut Afterpay. up more than 300 per cent to $118, followed by online retailer Kogan, up 150 per cent to $19. Miners Mineral Resources rallied 127 per cent to $37.45 and Fortescue 119 per cent to $23.43 on the back of a surge in iron ore prices.

The worst hit on the benchmark index were travel stocks, with Flight Centre down 60 per cent on the year to $15.85, while shopping mall operator Unibail-Westfield was down 54 per cent to $5.10 and Webjet was off 46 per cent to $5.07.

Paul Skamvougeras, head of equities at Perpetual Investments, said the current Australian market valuation was expensive relative to history and the risk was that the anticipated rebound in earnings post the COVID pandemic did not eventuate as expected.

"The biggest tail risk for markets is rising interest rates driven by inflation. Although a low probability, this would impact high asset prices," he said.

Perpetual was cautiously optimistic on the outlook for the Australian economy for 2021, he said.

"Given our view on the economy, we are invested in domestic Aussie cyclicals such as builders and banks. We expect the Australian dollar to be strong and are underweight US dollar earners," he said.

"As the economy rebounds in 2021 and corporate confidence returns we expect to see large-scale merger and acquisition activity, driven by historically low borrowing costs." Geoff Wilson, chairman and founder of $3.5bn fund Wilson Asset Management, said the sectors representing value in the Australian market in 2021 would be domestic tourism, housing and infrastructure. "The housing sector will be driven by a combination of record low interest rates, government stimulus measures and improving consumer confidence, to underpin both new and existing dwelling demand," he said.

"Companies we like here include Ingenia Communities, Fletcher Building, Brickworks, Reliance Worldwide, Australian Finance Group and Johns Lyng. A number of these companies will benefit from additional tailwinds provided by infrastructure-related fiscal measures, along with Downer and Maas Group." Tom Millner, director and portfolio manager at Contact Asset Management, said he would maintain his focus in 2021 on quality companies with sustainable dividends and growing earnings. "We are going to see, we think, some good results out of the better quality companies like Woolworths, Wesfarmers, CBA, ARB, Reece, Resmed and Harvey Norman," he said.

"And alignment is a big theme in these environments. You want management and the board to own shares in the companies because they are representing the shareholders and their best interests are of the shareholders and when they are shareholders themselves they tend to make sensible decisions about acquisitions, debt levels and payout ratios." Armytage Private portfolio director Bradley King said it was unlikely that the boom from mid 2020 to the end of the year could be repeated.

But Mr King said some resources stocks could continue to do well in 2021, especially those minerals exposed to battery use such as lithium and nickel.

LOSERS Flight Centre " 60% to $15.85

Unibail-Rodamco-Westfield " 54% to $5.10 IOOF Holdings " 51% to $3.52 Oil Search " 47% to $3.71 Webjet " 46% to $5.07 Origin Energy " 44% to $4.76 Treasury Wine Estate " 42% to $9.40 AGL Energy " 42% to $11.95 IAG " 39% to $4.70 Bravura Solution " 38% to $3.22

WINNERS Afterpay ▲ 303% to $118.00 Kogan.com ▲ 150% to $19.00 Mineral Resources ▲ 127% to $37.45 Fortescue Metals ▲ 119% to $23.43 Netwealth ▲ 104% to $15.94 Polynovo ▲ 97% to $3.88 NEXTDC ▲ 86% to $12.23 Xero ▲ 84% to $146.82 OZ Minerals ▲▲ 79% to $18.88 Lynas Rare Earths ▲ 73% to $3.98
---
ST George Dragons star Jack de Belin could be sidelined for his second full season after his sexual assault case was again adjourned.

A decision on complex pre-trial arguments is still weeks away, meaning the trial might not proceed until November. De Belin's contract with the Dragons is due to expire at the end of this year.

While the former NSW Origin star hasn't been able to play for more than a year, he has still been able to train with the team and has been receiving his full pay.

De Belin and co-accused Callan Sinclair have pleaded not guilty to five charges of aggravated sexual assault, after they were accused of assaulting a woman, 19, in December 2018.

De Belin became the first player to be sidelined under the NRL's no-fault stand down policy, which stops players facing serious criminal charges taking the field.

His trial was supposed to start on February 3 this year but the two weeks allotted for the trial were taken up by legal argument.

The case was adjourned to April but was again pushed back due to COVID-19, with the case finally recommencing last Monday. By Friday afternoon, de Belin's barrister and the Crown prosecutor were yet to finish their submissions, forcing Judge Andrew Haesler to set aside more time in July for arguments to wrap up.
---
KNOWING THE RIGHT BARGAIN BASEMENT PLAYERS IS KEY TO KFC SUPERCOACH NRL SUCCESS. WE TAKE A LOOK AT THE YOUNG TALENT SET TO SHINE IN 2021.

ZAC SADDLER (Sea Eagles) FRF, 2RF - Rookie A 201cm forward almost quit the game after an unhappy stint with the Bulldogs, but Des Hasler and Noel Cleal talked him into joining the Sea Eagles. In his one game for the Blacktown Workers in 2020 Saddler ran for 105m, and made 15 tackles, two tackle breaks and an offload in 33 minutes at prop. More enticing was his performance for the Indigenous All-Stars where Saddler played 60 minutes, mostly on an edge, running for 83m, with 34 tackles (none missed), two offloads and two tackle busts. The Sea Eagles have a good stock of middle forwards, but not much in the way of edges with Jack Gosiewski and new recruit Andrew Davey seemingly competing to fill the shoes of Joel Thompson. He looks a quality cheapie.

JAYDEN SULLIVAN (Dragons) HFB - Games: 1, PPG: 58, MPG: 80 The diminutive half made an impression in his NRL debut against Melbourne in round 20 last season with 26 tackles (no misses), a try assist, a last touch, a forced dropout and eight runs. A local junior, Sullivan led the 2019 SG Ball team to victory, played five games Jersey Flegg that year and was a key part of the South Coast Black Cockatoos team that won the 2019 Koori Knockout competition. High-priced halves Ben Hunt and Corey Norman are ahead of him, but Hunt has spent time at hooker and Norman was far from impressive at times in 2020.

CHARLIE STAINES (Panthers) CTW, FLB - Games: 2, PPG: 112, MPG: 54 In 107 minutes of NRL action 'The Forbes Ferrari' scored six tries, including four on debut, before a hamstring injury ended his season. Penrith have already flagged that he will be given first crack at the starting left wing spot at the expense of Josh Mansour, who has been told he can leave the club. Staines will get a steep discount on his 2020 average but will need one to fit into the cheapie category, otherwise he may need to be moved to the mid-range bible.

CHRISTIAN TUIPULOTU (Sea Eagles) CTW - Games: 1, PPG: 67, MPG: 80 In his only NRL start for the Roosters, Tuipulotu scored 67 points with 23 runs, four tackle busts, a linebreak and a try - all against the Melbourne Storm. That's tremendous workrate for SuperCoaches and for Manly, who have snapped him up. Tuipulotu also played one game in the NSW Cup in 2020 and in that game he had 22 runs for 157m. Expect him to put serious pressure on incumbent winger Jorge Taufua.

BEN CONDON (Cowboys) 2RF - Games: 1, PPG: 14, MPG: 17 Made his NRL debut in round 19 last season, making 10 tackles and four runs in 17 minutes. A Queensland under-20 Origin representative, Condon has the frame to play middle - he's 196cm and 110kg - and the mobility to play on an edge. The Cowboys have a good crop of forwards, but they did lose Gavin Cooper and John Asiata in the off-season so there's minutes to be earned.

PAUL TURNER (Warriors) HFB - Games: 1, PPG: 48, MPG: 80 A fast-stepping star of the future, Turner crossed the line twice on debut only to be denied by the video referee each time. His agility is a nightmare for defenders with Turner busting eight tackles in his debut game from just seven runs. Warriors scout Peter O'Sullivan expects Turner to play plenty more games in 2021. "He can do things in the game that nobody else in our club can do," O'Sullivan said. "He is our go-to if Kodi Nikorima gets injured but we'd also like to take a look at him in the centres at some stage as well."

TOM ALE (Warriors) FRF - Games: 1, PPG: 18, MPG: 12 Made his NRL debut in round 19 against Canberra as a development player but has been upgraded into the top 30 for 2021. The junior Kiwi rugby prodigy was even part of the Chiefs' under-18s side. Likened to Jason Taumalolo for his hard running and tackle-breaking, Ale must improve his fitness to increase his chances of becoming a regular first-grader. "He has lovely feet and legs at the line," O'Sullivan said. "He has an offload in his game and can beat people." The departure of Adam Blair, Lachlan Burr and Agnatius Paasi creates opportunity in the middle, although Ben Murdoch-Masila, Addin Fonua-Blake and Kane Evans arrived in the off-season.

JOSH SCHUSTER Sea Eagles) 5/8 - Games: 1, PPG: 31, MPG: 65 With hooker Danny Levi gone there is a spine spot up for grabs, and Schuster play five-eighth if Kieran Foran moves to dummy-half. Schuster looked very impressive in his debut last year (which Benji Marshall called the "the best I've seen in my time ever") before going down injured. But in 65 minutes he still scored 31 points, including 19 points in base, a forced dropout, two offloads and a try contribution. He is competing with Foran, Lachlan Croker and Cade Cust for a place but, if he keeps a starting spot, he would be a near must cheapie for KFC SuperCoaches.

MAX FEAGAI (Dragons) CTW - Games: 2, PPG: 20, MPG: 51 The first of the Feagai twins to play first grade, Max appeared in the Dragons' final two matches of 2020 with a round 19 bench cameo and 80 minutes on the wing in round 20. Euan Aitken's departure frees up a starting left centre spot. Brayden Wiliame may have his nose in front in the race to nab that spot but Feagai is sure to be in new coach Anthony Griffin's thoughts come selection time and I expect to see more of him in 2021.

SAM WALKER (Roosters) HFB - Rookie Still only 18, Walker is seen as the Roosters' long-term halfback, given Kyle Flanagan's departure. "I think the rule changes will suit him. He's got good acceleration, that bit of footwork, the passing game on both sides. Once he gets confident with organising the side, which comes with experience and exposure to that higher level," said Tony Adam, who coached Walker in the Australian Schoolboys in 2019. Walker's not a walk-up start, though, with Lachlan Lam, Drew Hutchison and former Warrior Adam Keighran competing for spots.

FRANKLIN PELE (Sharks) FRF - Rookie At 190cm and a rather spectacular 132kg, the 2018 Australian Schoolboys representative has earned big raps from coach Josh Morris. "Frankie did a whole pre-season with us this year, performed well in our two NRL trials, scored a try in one of them," said Morris. "He is a big powerful player who runs hard and seems to be getting bigger by the year." With Aaron Woods, Andrew Fifita, Braden Hamlin-Uele, Toby Rudolf and Aiden Tolman demanding minutes, Pele may have to wait a little longer to debut.

STEFANO UTOIKAMANU (Wests Tigers) FRF - Games: 3, PPG: 14, MPG: 8 Limited game time after debuting with Parramatta in 2020, you can't fault his PPM of 1.79. In NSW Cup he averaged almost 100m per game (35 of them post-contact) with a couple of tackle busts and 25 tackles. The ability is immense and why Michael Maguire personally recruited him. Starting prop Josh Aloiai has left but Utoikamanu is still competing with James Tamou, Joe Ofahengaue, Alex Twal, Thomas Mikaele, Zane Musgrove and Russell Packer for minutes in the middle.

JAKE SIMPKIN (Wests Tigers) HOK - Rookie Jacob Liddle may have an edge in experience and get first crack at the No.9 jersey, but Simpkin appears the more exciting prospect. He impressed in Queensland's under-18 Origin in 2019 (41 tackles, 86 running metres and a try) before COVID-19 restricted him to just one game of NSW Cup (45 minutes with 26 tackles made, 32 running metres and a try assist). There's a strong chance that we see both Liddle and Simpkin in round one. It will be tempting to grab Simpkin at bottom dollar as he has the type of attacking game that can see him score well in restricted minutes.

JOCK MADDEN (Wests Tigers) HFB - Rookie The former Australian Schoolboys star has been elevated into the top squad as Luke Brook's understudy. A traditional No.7, Madden is not expected to play five-eighth with Adam Doueihi the leading contender to partner Brooks. A prodigious kicker, Madden is also good with the ball in hand averaging just over 65 run metres per game playing NSW Cup in 2019/20.

GREG MARZHEW (formerly Leleisiuao) (Titans) CTW- Rookie Has the potential to be a SuperCoach stud, if he can get on the field. He's been a potential cheapie star for three years now, when he set alight the Parramatta under-20s. Marzhew was superb in the 2020 Nines for the Titans, and ran for 150m+ metres and made an incredible 14 tackle busts in the opening game of the 2020 QCup. And yet, no NRL debut. Maybe this will be the year for Marzhew.

BEN TRBOJEVIC (Sea Eagles) CTW, 2RF- Rookie Des Hasler was cagey when asked about the third Trbojevic, who is now in Manly's top 30. At 193cm and 105kg, he can play in the centres or in the back row. But, given their backline depth, the 19-year-old is more likely to be use at centre, or off the bench, in 2021.

LINDSAY SMITH (Panthers) FRF - Rookie The loss of James Tamou and Jack Hetherington creates space in the middle and SuperCoaches will be hoping this local junior can capitalise on that opportunity. An Australian Schoolboy in 2017 and Jersey Flegg star in 2019, Smith was impressive in the only NSW Cup game of 2020, playing 53 minutes at prop, running for 146 metres, making 33 tackles, two tackle busts and an offload. Middle forward Matt Eisenhuth's addition makes it harder but Zane Tetevano has attracted the Super League interest, leaving James Fisher-Harris, Moses Leota and Spencer Leniu vying for places.

JIRAH MOMOISEA (Knights) 2RF - Rookie Elevated to the top-30 squad early in 2020, the former prop turned second-row prospect will be pushing to make his NRL debut. Momoisea was impressive in the one game of NSW Cup in 2020, playing 80 minutes on an edge making 41 tackles, running for 149 metres and throwing an offload. The Knights are blessed with two 80-minute second rowers in Lachlan Fitzgibbon and Tyson Frizell, but should injury strike then Momoisea is ready to step in.

KYLE PATERSON (Sharks) HOK - Rookie A former Queensland under-19s representative, Paterson joined Cronulla from Canberra last year. The talented rake played a crucial role in Canberra making the 2019 Jersey Flegg grand final, registering 13 tries and 17 try assists in 21 matches. Quick off the mark and sharp around the ruck, Patterson will operate as a back-up for Blayke Brailey.

MATT MOYLAN (Sharks) FLB, 5/8 - Games: 8, PPG: 29, MPG: 68 Just 11 games in two years, he is a risk. But the Sharks will be without chief playmaker Shaun Johnson (Achilles injury) for the opening 8-10 rounds, meaning there is opportunity for reward. If Moylan can find his 2016-2018 form then you're getting a player capable of averaging double his asking price and that's some reward.

THE RAIDERS CONTENDERS With Nick Cotric gone, Curtis Scott's mixed form and Jarrod Croker set to miss the start of the season through injury there are backline spots up for grabs at the Raiders. Here are the contenders:

MATT TIMOKO (Raiders) CTW - Games: 2, PPG: 28, MPG: 57 The young Kiwi played two first-grade games in 2020, debuting off the bench in round 16 and then playing the full game at centre in round 20. In that final game, Timoko made 10 runs and 15 tackles (34 base points) along with four tackle busts and an offload for 41 points all up. Either Timoko or Harley Smith-Shields will replace Croker.

HARLEY SMITH-SHIELDS (Raiders) CTW - Games: 2, PPG: 33, MPG: 55 Debuted off the bench in round 11 and start at centre in round 20, scoring a try (with linebreak) and finishing with 55 SuperCoach points. Based on 2019 stats, Timoko gets through slightly more work in defence, HSS more work with the ball. Their SuperCoach value will be largely determined by how Croker's recovery progresses.

BAILEY SIMONSSON (Raiders) CTW, FLB - Games: 7, PPG: 23, MPG: 59 Has been a preseason standout after a shoulder injury ended his 2020 season. In the four 80-minute games Simonsson played he averaged 35.5PPG which accords with the 38PPG he averaged across 18 games in 2019. Cotric's likely replacement he will be a tempting buy priced around plenty of competition.

KFC SUPERCOACH NRL 2021 PRICES REVEALED dailytelegraph.com.au
---
The Aussie star's dream cast is in place to start shooting her latest TV project, writes Annette Sharp Production on the Nicole Kidman-backed television short series Nine Perfect Strangers gets underway on the NSW North Coast on Monday, bringing hope to an ailing arts industry and more than a dash of Hollywood pizzazz to Byron Bay's sleepy hinterland.

Cameras will start rolling 72 hours after the final piece of the casting puzzle fell into place on Friday, with news earthy New Jersey actor Bobby Cannavale, star of Blue Jasmine and The Irishman, has joined the cast alongside Oscar-nominated US funny woman Melissa McCarthy and co-producer Kidman.

Sources were unable to confirm whether Cannavale's Australian partner Rose Byrne and the couple's young sons, Rocco and Rafa, have also swapped COVID-19 crushed New York for the Northern Rivers for the 19-week shoot.

In recent weeks a rural property on the outskirts of Byron Bay has been transformed into a Californian-style health retreat for the eight-episode Hulu series that reunites Kidman with Australian co-producer Bruna Papandrea and top-selling Sydney novelist Liane Moriarty, upon whose book, Big Little Lies, the women's previous Golden Globe-winning TV series was based.

Nine Perfect Strangers tells the story of nine stressed and worn-out characters that check into boutique health resort Tranquillum hoping to transform themselves.

Among the group is a romance novelist, a lottery winner, a grieving couple whose son has died, a single mother looking to shed weight and a divorce lawyer. Each hopes the unconventional Russian retreat proprietor Masha (Kidman) can reinvigorate them.

The series, directed by Jonathan Levine, has been a passion project for Kidman and Papandrea since they acquired the rights to the novel ahead of its literary release in July 2018.

The series also sees Kidman reunited with acclaimed US TV director David E. Kelley, creator and screenwriter of Big Little Lies.

Kidman and her husband Keith Urban, and daughters Sunday and Faith, returned to Australia three weeks ago and bunkered down at their Southern Highlands property for two weeks of mandatory, police-supervised quarantine.

The series shoot is scheduled to wrap in mid-December, freeing the Kidman-Urbans to spend Christmas in Australia.

THE PLAYERS HEADING INTO THE RETREAT MELISSA MCCARTHY Two-time Oscar nominated American comedic actress best known for Bridesmaids, Ghostbusters and Gilmore Girls.

McCarthy (right) plays Frances Welty, a 50-something twice-divorced romance novelist. She is suffering from physical pain manifested by career and romance issues.

Bruised by criticism - and news her editor won't be publishing her 19th book - she retreats to Tranquillum House following a recommendation from a friend.

BOBBY CANNAVALE Emmy-nominated American actor best known for Blue Jasmine, Boardwalk Empire and Mr Robot.

Cannavale stars as Tony "Smiley" Hogburn, a star football player (originally an AFL legend in Moriarty's book, but readapted for screen) with a face full of tattoos.

Newly divorced, the 56-year-old ex-athlete is depressed about getting older and checks into the retreat to figure out if life is worth living.

REGINA HALL American actress best known for Girls Trip, Support The Girls and Scary Movie. Hall (below, left) stars as Carmel Schneider, a mother-of-four whose husband has left her for a younger woman.

ASHER KEDDIE Logie-winning Australian actress best known for X-Men Origins: Wolverine, Paper Giants: The Birth Of Cleo, Offspring and Love My Way.

Keddie (below, right) is Heather Marconi, wife of Napoleon.

She's angry about her son's death, but, unlike her husband, refuses to move on, choosing instead to live with her grief. Heather believes she is responsible for Zach's death.

MELVIN GREGG American actor and social media entertainer known for The Way Back and High Flying Bird.

Gregg (left) is Ben Chandler, Jessica's Lamborghini-obsessed husband who isn't happy with the way his wife has changed since their lottery win, though he's very happy with his car. Ben wants their pre-lottery marriage back.

SAMARA WEAVING Australian actress and model best known for Home And Away, Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri, Picnic At Hanging Rock.

Weaving (below, middle) plays Jessica Chandler, the 20-something plastic surgery obsessed wife of Ben. The couple are struggling after winning $22 million.

They check in to the spa to save their marriage.

MICHAEL SHANNON American actor best known for Nocturnal Animals, 99 Homes, The Shape Of Water, Loving and Waco. Shannon (right) plays Napoleon Marconi who, with his wife Heather, checks in to the retreat to deal with the grief of losing a son.

He needs to be strong for his wife and daughter and blames himself for Zach's death GRACE VAN PATTEN American actress best known for Under The Silver Lake, The Meyerowitz Stories and The Sopranos.

Van Patten (left) stars as Zoe, Heather and Napoleon's 20-year-old daughter, Zach's twin.

She's angry with her brother for taking his own life - and blames herself for not being able to stop him.

LUKE EVANS (RIGHT) Welsh actor and singer best known for The Hobbit, Beauty And The Beast, The Girl On The Train and Dracula Untold.

Evans is Lars Lee, the handsome divorce lawyer who only represents female clients. Lars appears to have it all: great job, great relationship.

He seems to have it figured out, but a hallucination has him haunted by a choice he made, one that has ruptured him relationship with his gay partner.

NICOLE KIDMAN Australian Oscar-winning actress best known for Big Little Lies, The Hours, Cold Mountain, Lion and Moulin Rouge!

Kidman anchors the production as Maria "Masha" Dmitrichenko - a former high-flying executive who has a come-to-God moment at the peak of her corporate career and reinvents herself as director of boutique health-and-wellness resort Tranquillum.

Masha's unorthodox methods often confound and terrify her clients. Her staff are Yao (Manny Jacinto), a former paramedic who once saved Masha's life, and Delilah (Tiffany Boone), the former PA-turned-wellness consultant who sees precisely what her boss is up to at Tranquillum House.
---
When the deputy chief health officer of Victoria calls Captain Cook an invader and likens him to COVID-19, we have a history problem. When two of our leading business figures oppose an inquiry into the origins of the coronavirus because it might hurt our trade with China, we have a self-respect problem.

And when the same Premiers that demand we must all "heed the science on climate-change" reject the science on children going back school, we have a credibility problem.

Recovering from a corona crisis that will kill off tens of thousands of businesses, hundreds of thousands of jobs and hundreds of billions in national wealth will demand a comprehensive reset in the way we approach our country's problems.

For the first time in decades, Australia faces real hardship and, to get through it, we can't afford any more of the indulgent thinking that's held us back.

All credit to the Morrison government for protecting Australia from the many thousands of deaths that this virus has caused in Britain, Europe, the US and elsewhere.

I'm not one of those who want to criticise them for locking us, and the economy, up in order to save lives; it's lousy to want to punish our country's success. But getting the economy back on track is likely to make the health effort look easy.

Last week, Roy Morgan estimated a staggering 10.5 million Australians have had a change to their employment due to this virus: 3.8 million have had their hours reduced, 2.7 million have been stood down, 1.4 million have had their pay cut and almost 700,000 have been made redundant. The PM said on Friday that restrictions can now start to ease but it will be a long time before this virus has worked its way out of the economy. And that's why the sooner we stop focusing on "First World problems" and get Australians back to work, the better.

Key in all of this has to be rebuilding manufacturing in this country - and, given high power prices are making the few industries we have left more and more marginal, fixing our energy mess remains an urgent priority.

For all the billionaires like Twiggy Forrest demanding the Prime Minister let China off the hook over this virus, let's not forget it's these same business types who contracted out to China all the things we used to make here for ourselves - putting balance sheet profit ahead of national security.

Yet there was Forrest last week, holding another dubious press conference to crow about importing goods from China that we used to manufacture here, then stinging the taxpayer hundreds of millions to reimburse him.

Is it any wonder people are angry about how economically dependent we have made ourselves on China - how much of our farming land, energy and water companies, ports, roads, agricultural processing plants and heaven knows what else we have sold off? While big business might have turned a blind eye to the Chinese Communist Party's longer-term agenda, the ordinary public are awake to it.

Last year, only 32 per cent of Australians told a Lowy Institute poll they trusted China to act "responsibly" - a 20-point fall on a year earlier, and this was before the coronavirus. And 74 per cent agreed Australia was "too economically dependent" on China too.

Convincing Australians we need to make more here won't be such a challenge. But it might be more difficult to get them to understand that, in order to achieve this, we must get rid of stifling rules and regulations that make operating a business here so hard.

So much of our green and red tape comes from bogus international agreements and bodies that politicians sign up to strike a pose without properly understanding the impact.

By all means, we must have laws in this country to protect our magnificent environment but those laws should be a reflection of what Australian voters decide is appropriate to strike the balance between new dams, power stations and development with whatever local frog is at risk, or the farce of punishing us for emissions caused overseas by our coal being burned there. With well over a doubling of unemployment and a 10 per cent drop in GDP likely, persisting with the regulatory delays that have typically held up major projects looks like economic self-harm.

The federal government knows (even if the states mostly do not) that a strong recovery from this corona crisis means lower taxes and less regulation, as well as a much more hard-headed approach to foreign investment, and self-reliance in strategic manufacturing.

A concern, though, are signals out of Canberra wanting a "consensus" on reform and suggesting the so-called National Cabinet might be the best way to achieve it.

The National Cabinet has worked well when the PM signs a big cheque but not so well when he doesn't. So far, the National Cabinet hasn't even been able to achieve a consensus on sending kids back to school, let alone hugely contentious issues like tax reform. If everything has to be achieved by agreement with Labor premiers, then the bar is set low. We might end up with a tougher line on foreign investment and maybe government intervention in strategic industries but there's no way we'll get the greater economic reforms needed to get our economy back on its feet, and to start paying back the trillion-dollar debt left over from this crisis.

It's leadership, not consensus, that's needed to make a difference on hard issues. We only have a consensus now on border protection, for example, because the Coalition was prepared for a colossal fight to stop the boats. And this was only possible because orders could be given to the Navy that didn't first require legislation in the Senate or the agreement of the states.

As things stand now, dams, power, planning, infrastructure, environmental regulation, public schools and public hospitals are all the legal responsibility of the states even if they are increasingly the political responsibility of the Commonwealth. Yet who really holds the states to account? Beyond maybe the premier, who can name relevant state ministers or even the opposition leader and how many of us actually understand how deeply in debt our states really are?

Since 2007, according to the Australian Election Study, our "satisfaction with democracy" has dropped 27 points to just 59 per cent. Much more than the revolving door prime ministership, my sense is that this is due to our national inability to get things done. Of all the things that must change after COVID-19, this is No.1.

THUMBS UP Retiring NSW fire chief Shane Fitzsimmons, who now moves to a new disaster recovery role. He hasn't forgotten there's still a lot to do for bushfire victims, even if others have.

THUMBS DOWNBillionaires who put self-interest before the national interest. You know who you are.
---
AUSSIE wheat farmers have become the latest victims of China's vendetta against our nation, with the communist state slashing its Australian wheat imports to an almost 10-year low.

It comes as Beijing ramps up its attack on Australian farm commodities and threatens to disrupt international trade worth hundreds of millions of dollars a year.

China imported 880 tonnes of Australian wheat in November - the lowest amount since 2011 - according to customs data, as tensions between Beijing and Canberra show no signs of abating.

Australia exports about $4.6 billion worth of wheat a year globally, with China accounting for about 10 per cent of it.

Beijing's tightening on Australian wheat comes amid a blockbuster crop for Australian farmers, with production forecast to more than double this season to about 31 million tonnes, according to the Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics (ABARE).

China's communist regime has already slapped punitive tariffs or banned a range of Australian products from barley, timber and beef, to wine and seafood after Scott Morrison sought an inquiry into the origins of COVID-19. editorial p58, business p60-61
---
TOUCH DOWN The terrible amount of injuries in the NRL so far this season are not just restricted to the players. Touch judge Kasey Badger has been ruled out for the season because of a bulging disk in her back that may require surgery. She will visit a specialist this week.

POTTER'S PUPPY SCHOOL Former Dally M player-of-the-year Mick Potter is making a comeback to coaching. He has been appointed head coach of Mounties, now the feeder club for the Canterbury Bulldogs.

Potter won the Dally M award when he was playing fullback at the Bulldogs in 1984.

He will work closely with new Canterbury coach Trent Barrett to develop fringe first graders.

Barrett has had a massive cleanout of the Bulldogs coaching staff with Steve Georgeallis, Harry Harris, Tony Grimaldi and Tony Ayoub all being moved on.

AB REACHES OUT TO GREEN Axed Cowboys coach Paul Green was spotted having lunch at Airlie Beach on Thursday with cricket legend Allan Border.

Border reached out to Green when he lost his job at the Cowboys in July. "When I got sacked AB sent me a really nice text," Green said, "He's one of my idols, so it was really uplifting. He's one of our greatest sporting legends.

"He told me I'd done a great job at the Cowboys and said my sacking was bullshit." Green was also in Brisbane last week to catch up with some old friends, including Maroons Origin teammate Paul 'Knuckles' Greenhill.

He denies he was there to speak to the Broncos.

JEFF & SUZEE GO THE DISTANCE Many said it would never last … When Jeff Fenech married his beautiful wife Suzee 24 years ago, guests - including James Packer - had their doubts.

"At the wedding reception they were even running a sweepstake on how long it would last," Fenech said.

"I think James picked six months and said I'd be lucky to last that long." Last week Fenech and his wife celebrated their 24th anniversary. Many believe that Suzee deserves a matrimonial medal.

The owner of Ecco at Drummoyne closed the restaurant for the night, just for the two of them to mark the occassion.

They ate caviar, lobster and prawns and had the best champagne and wines.

SOUTHS' MASKED CRUSADE The Rabbitohs' most popular merchandise item this year are the COVID-19 masks. Fans have snapped up 7000 of the 9000 that have been made with the club's logo in four colours.

At $20 each, it's been a profitable exercise for a footy club that has suffered like all NRL teams from not having full attendances at their home games in 2020. Owner Russell Crowe came up with the mask idea and gave away 1000 to Souths members over 70.
---
MINE THREAT TO PILLARS OF HORSE INDUSTRY I am writing in support of Coolmore Australia and Godolphin regarding your article on the battle to stop a mine development on their doorstep (Turf war goes underground as stud faces mine, 20/11).

I am dismayed to learn that mining groups continue to relentlessly pursue the land which forms the cornerstone of Australia's thoroughbred racing and breeding industry.

The amount of time, energy and money that has gone into constantly fighting the mines' failed attempts to establish large operations in the heart of horse breeding country is ridiculous.

The newly-proposed Maxwell mine's proximity to two of Australia's most prestigious horse studs, Coolmore Australia and Godolphin, threatens to not only profoundly impact the thoroughbred industry but also the water supply and the health of the animals and people that live there.

I grew up on Coolmore Australia and witnessed first hand the love that is put into cultivating this stunning property and their world-class care of horses.

I am not against mining and I understand that it is an important industry in the Upper Hunter.

But, the fact remains that the proximity of this mine to these pillars of the Australian thoroughbred industry is unacceptable.

I urge the ministers and state government to not allow a new attack on these properties.

Kristen Grimley, Coogee

Army top brass needs to come under fire too The allegations of atrocities in Afghanistan by soldiers is alarming but conclusions should not be drawn until a full and fair investigation is conducted.

After a 40-year association with the army I find it difficult, or perhaps impossible, to believe that knowledge or at least strong rumour of these allegations had not reached top echelons of the military some time ago (Rank behaviour: How did ADF top brass fail to acknowledge grim realities on ground for troops, 20/11).

If it is to be, let not the axe fall on only the lower ranks. Brian Whybrow, Wanniassa, ACT

War crimes a national tragedy It is a profound psychological shock to the nation that innocent citizens and children have been murdered by a 'warrior' coterie of special forces (Dagger to the heart, 20/11).

Our long-prized ethic of fair go and decency has been violated. So has our proud history of complying with humane protocols about the treatment of others in war.

Deploring the likes of al-Qaeda now will sound hollow. Descending to such abysmal levels ourselves might have terrible future consequences for our own captured servicemen and women.

Also, occasions like Anzac Day and Remembrance Day might be infected by these shocking events by distracting from honourable thoughts of commemoration and heroism.

What a national tragedy.

Ron Sinclair, Bathurst

Brave history not tarnished The allegations against Australian special forces are frightening and disappointing to say the least (Dagger to the heart, 20/11).

The history of Australian forces in combat is impeccable and should be remembered when the current allegations are investigated.

Any negative findings should not reflect in any way on men and women who have served this country in the past or are current enlisted (and innocent) personnel.

It is alleged 19 soldiers killed 39 civilians or prisoners outside the guidelines of the Geneva Convention.

These alleged occurrences should be investigated thoroughly to establish if there is any wrongdoing and each allegation should be investigated on it's merits.

Hopefully, the investigation will not be long and drawn out in order that we can move forward.

Brian Tovey, Hammondville NSW

Speed limit signs are enough I don't understand all the fuss about the removal of what are called warning signs alerting motorists to speed camera locations (No warning signs for speeders, 19/11).

There are always warning signs - they consist of a set of large black numbers inside a big red circle on a large white background posted at the roadside.

That sign should be all that is needed to warn people to stay below a certain speed.

Doug Richards, Tamarama

Taming our schools Principals and teachers are facing record levels of stress and burnout as violence and offensive behaviour continues to rise in NSW schools (School under siege, Saturday 14/11).

A case in point was a vicious bashing of a Year 9 girl at a Western Sydney high school, the latest in a string of at least 12 serious incidents at the school since July this year.

The state government has reacted with an army of nurses to be posted to primary and high schools to treat and refer pupils dealing with mental health issues (Nurse army to the rescue, Sunday 15/11). Let's hope the state government also have further measures in mind to bring about healthy change at our schools.

Peter Penglis, Kambah, ACT

Regional power struggle Right now, Prime Minister Scott Morrison doesn't need a lecture from China's bullying government on the best way for Australia to manage its sovereign interests (True blue values not for trade, 20/11). As the PM rightly states, "Australia's values are not up for trade".

Perhaps the PM should also politely remind President Xi, that Australia doesn't need to keep importing China's cheap solar panels either ... we are happy with our locally-sourced, reliable cheap baseload coal and gas power.

Bob Partington, Wahroonga

Expensive complexities The NSW Treasurer has good intentions in wanting to change the tax regime when buying a house (Dom's call of duty, 18/11).

But the problem really starts earlier than the buying/selling of a house - it's in the building of it.

Council regulations and applications are painstaking and expensive not to mention time delays. Then there's building regulations bound so tightly in red and green tape.

You need a workforce to begin with and trying to make sense of the building and construction award is harder than putting a man on the moon and just as expensive.

You need licences like never before (a licence to have so many licences is about the only one they haven't thought of yet).

You need office staff to report every action you take for the ATO who will then cross check with everyone else who cross checks.

And, to think you haven't even turned a sod yet.

Barry Laurie, Tweed Heads

A message to you, Rudy Fake news or does Giuliani dye his hair dark (Hair dye sweat drips down Giuliani's face in press conference - Online, 20/11)?

At last we are getting down to the important issues in the recent election. Give up dyeing it Rudy, no one cares and soon you will be out of the public view as the election results are finalised.

Dennis Fitzgerald, Box Hill, Victoria

Briefly ...

The emperor Nero fiddled while Rome burnt and US President Donald Trump is playing golf while America is in turmoil and people are passing in high numbers from COVID-19.

Ed Partyka, Coffs Harbour "" " Okay, so Brad Fittler after two successful origins, misses the third. He is still by far the best person to restore our rightful place as greater than Queensland.

Geoff Hinds, Merrylands "" " Cameron Smith had better retire otherwise he'll be playing reserve grade if Harry Grant returns to the Storm next season. What a revelation this young fella is and what a career lies ahead for him.

John McKinnon, Kareela

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
AGRIBUSINESS Grain import cut not so crucial CHINA has slashed its Australian wheat imports to an almost 10-year low as Beijing ramps up its attack on Australian farm commodities and threatens to disrupt international trade worth hundreds of millions of dollars a year.

China imported 880 tonnes of Australian wheat in November - the lowest since 2011 - according to customs data, as tensions between Beijing and Canberra show no signs of abating. Australia exports about $4.6bn worth of wheat a year globally, with China accounting for about 10 per cent.

Beijing's tightening on Australian wheat comes amid a blockbuster crop for Australian farmers, with production forecast to more than double this season to about 31 million tonnes, according to the Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics (ABARE).

China's communist regime has already slapped punitive tariffs or banned a range of Australian products from barley, timber and beef, to wine and seafood after Scott Morrison sought an inquiry into the origins of COVID-19 and Australia's foreign interfer-ence laws angered Beijing.

It comes as the world wheat price is forecast to surge 11 per cent this financial year to an average of $US245 ($322.50) a tonne, reflecting a fall in production in some major exporting countries in 2020-21, and dryness during the 2021-22 winter crop planting window in the US, the European Union and Russia, ABARE said in its December quarterly report.

High domestic grain prices are expected also to result in China's total wheat import demand being the highest in 25 years, at eight million tonnes.

"This demand is likely to be met by wheat exports from the US and the Black Sea -region," ABARE said.

"Smaller exportable surpluses from these major exporters will provide Australia with an opportunity to meet demand in other markets," it said.

Australian wheat is highly sought after in Asian markets, and more than 30 per cent is used in Asian noodles thanks to Australian wheat's starch and protein quality.

Indonesia is the biggest buyer of Australian wheat, with exports worth about $739m a year, more than double the Chinese wheat trade, which is worth about $346m. Other top Asian markets for Australian wheat include the Philippines ($465m), Vietnam ($404m) and Korea ($361m).

Australian grain growers have been anticipating China to target wheat but, unlike barley where China has historically bought 60-70 per cent of Australia's crop, it hasn't been a crucial market for Australian wheat. ABARE warned of continuing disruptions in Australia's trade with China, "despite the economic benefits trade brings to both countries", with the biggest hits to barley and wine.
---
RESTRICTIONS in parts of the northern beaches are -expected to be eased today after the number of new COVID-19 infections dropped, but a new mystery cluster in the western suburbs has authorities on edge.

Health officials remain poised to enforce a full lockdown should numbers spike with Premier Glady Berijklian warning the government will take drastic action should the situation worsen.

"We are at a stage in the pandemic where we do need to be on high alert, we want to make sure we've captured all those strains of transmission," she said yesterday.

"Dealing with this pandemic is an evolving situation and every day things can change, every day the government will consider new settings if we need to, every day the government will make -decisions and move swiftly if we feel we need to." Just three new cases were recorded from 32,000 tests yesterday - two men from the same household and a male close contact - but they are a concern to officials as they are not linked to the Avalon -cluster.

Ms Berejiklian urged residents of Greystanes, Berala, Auburn and Lidcombe to be tested as health officials continue to investigate the origin of the mystery cases.

There was some much needed good news for those on the northern beaches with the Premier saying she will announce the easing of some restrictions today.

"Tomorrow we will be -adjusting the settings ... -especially the southern side of the northern beaches will feel some relief tomorrow," she said yesterday.

Further south, a Wollongong restaurant has become the focus of an urgent NSW Health investigation after it was revealed one of two local positive cases had dined there on the same day as someone from the Croydon cluster.

The Swallowed Anchor on Crown St has been temporarily closed and anyone who visited at any time of the day on Saturday December 19 must get tested immediately.

Neither of the two cases who visited the Swallowed -Anchor were infected when they visited the premises.

Genomic sequencing has confirmed both Wollongong and Croydon clusters are linked to the Avalon cluster and NSW Health is investigating whether someone exposed to the outbreak in Sydney's north has visited the restaurant while infectious. Residents on the Far South Coast are also on alert after two Victorians tested positive after crossing the border and visiting the Great Southern Hotel in Eden on December 30 and Bermi's Beachside Cafe on New Year's Eve. The couple, who were on a holiday road trip, got tested in NSW after learning a Thai restaurant where they had dined in the Melbourne suburb of Black Rock had become the centre of a new cluster. They have since returned to Victoria.
---
MUNDINE HITS THE SWEET SPOT Anyone who has played sport at any level knows exactly what the "the sweet spot" is - an indisputable winner.

Warren Mundine's Daily Telegraph article (Our song and our game, 30/10) is an indelible sweet spot of truth.

Paul, Central Coast.

"" " What a fantastic opinion piece by Warren Mundine regarding the national anthem (Our song and our game, 30/10).

His comment that "if it wasn't for the general sports-loving Australian public who love to sing the anthem you highly paid sportspeople wouldn't be highly paid" has hit the nail right on the head.

John Stuart, St Fillans "" " Wonderful! Wonderful! Warren!

Thank you so much for your article today (Our song and our game, 30/10). You have restored my faith in human nature and I'm thrilled that the underestimated ability of having "commonsense" is still alive.

Ann Barnes, Davistown "" " I read Warren Mundine's article on the national anthem controversy (Our song and our game, 30/10).

All I can say about it is that he is a wonderful man with an Australian Aboriginal heart.

He should be our next prime minister.

The players that don't want the anthem are overpaid and should go and get a real job.

Leslie Parker, NSW

Rejoicing over uniting behind our anthem The backlash to the NRL's initial decision to ban the national anthem at the State of Origin gives me faith in my fellow Australians (All let us rejoice, 30/10).

Having gone through the bushfires and then COVID-19, the footy season has given us all a reason to cheer, thanks to Peter V'landys' brilliant negotiation skills.

Politics should never be a part of sport, therefore I am prepared to forgive the original misstep by the football officials on this occasion.

"We are one, we are Australian" and "united we stand, divided we fall"; just look at what is happening in America.

Janice Russell, Malua Bay

Protecting a national asset NRL officials were 100 per cent correct to initially omit the national anthem from State of Origin games (Origin of a backflip, 30/10). They were right, but for the wrong reasons.

The anthem should only be heard at events of national or international significance.

Military and state funerals, remembrance days and sporting occasions against other nations are appropriate.

Permission should be sought to use it, so valuable should it be to our national psyche.

It should not be allowed to be a political football for activists to show disrespect before polemic sporting games.

We must treat it as one of our truly national assets, withheld from frivolous overuse and devalued by those undermining our national identity and unity.

Aggressive, divisive and competing sporting teams pitting Australians against each other is surely the exact opposite to the call for unison echoing through the chords and lyrics of our anthem.

Alan Sexton, North Parramatta

Horror at French attack I was deeply shocked and saddened by the terrorist attack that took place in a church - the Notre Dame Basilica in Nice, France (Three parishioners dead in bloody terrorist attack, 30/10).

My thoughts and prayers are with the families of the victims and their loved ones.

I strongly condemn this terrorist attack and request everyone to stay united against this extreme violence so that we can defeat this extremist behaviour and ideology that is totally against the peaceful teaching of Islam.

Syed Sadaqat Ahmed, Tarneit, Victoria

Outrage on the menu What are they teaching university students these days? Have they introduced a new course that teaches people how to be outraged for no reason about things that have absolutely no effect on their lives?

Take the recent outrage from a university student on social media calling for the boycotting of a restaurant in Waterloo and labelling the owner a racist all because he said he supported Donald Trump in the upcoming US election (A meal with a side of Trump, 30/10).

Who cares? If I was that university student I would be asking myself why what other people think about a politician in a different country makes them so angry and consulting a dictionary to find out what the word racist really means.

I think it's actually just confected outrage expressed by sheep pretending they are activists, who think they are somehow supporting their compatriots in the US.

B Thompson, Cowra

Nazi stain needs erasing In recent times auction houses in Australia and New Zealand have been involved in the trade of Nazi memorabilia including flags.

On occasion Nazi objects have been pulled from sale due to public pressure. We are now told Nazi flags have been flown in public, including from suburban back yards, at least 31 times in the past two years (Nazi flags fly over NSW, Sunday 25/10).

It seems Section 93Z of the Crimes Act does not go far enough to outlaw Nazi flags from being flown.

Now there are calls for government action to stop this "racist cancer" in NSW. The government needs to take action to ban trade in these vile artefacts and, secondly, beef-up the Crimes Act in relation to flying Nazi flags.

Peter Penglis, Kambah, ACT

Postal boss deserves apology ScoMo, I think you made a big mistake in pillorying Christine Holgate in parliament ('Humiliated' by the PM, 30/10).

She deserved better than that. You should now apologise immediately - quietly if necessary - and find a way to set it right.

It's now time to admit to your over-reaction.

Chris Welch, Drummoyne

Is Anybody to blame?

I have listened diligently to the Board of Inquiry hearing and I have finally worked out the story of the hotel quarantine bungle in Victoria.

There were four people responsible named Everybody, Somebody, Anybody and Nobody.

There was an important job to be done and Everybody was sure that Somebody would do it.

Anybody could have done it, but Nobody did it.

Somebody got angry about that because it was Everybody's job. Everybody thought Anybody could do it, but nobody realised that Everybody wouldn't do it.

It ended up that Everybody blamed Somebody when Nobody did what Anybody could have.

I'm glad I cleared that up for you all. Good for a laugh in these tough times, especially in Victoria.

K. Bryant, Rivett, ACT

Briefly … Why are some condemning Annastacia Palaszczuk for closing the Queensland border, but praising Gladys Berejiklian for closing the NSW border to Victorians? A case of double standards?

Colleen Northam, Taree "" " Dear Matt Kean, please come to the Hunter Valley if you're game and explain to coal miners and gas workers why you want to destroy their livelihoods with renewables (He's Kean on green reasoning, not on gas, 29/10).

Dazza, Singleton "" " Where are all the brave and fearless leaders? Annastacia Palaszczuk and Joe Biden both want to win elections based on fear, fear and more fear. A sure-fire race to the bottom.

Arvid, Kiama

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
MARKETS Moody's expects damage repair A LEADING ratings agency says Australia's economy will not emerge from the coronavirus pandemic permanently weaker, paving the way for the country to remain one of the few AAA-rated nations.

In a report on Wednesday, Moody's Investors Service said that despite a record contraction in the June quarter, Australia was "unlikely to face a lasting drop in potential growth or weakening in fiscal strength over the longer term".

The vote of confidence from one of the three major international ratings agencies comes as the nation charts a surprisingly brisk path out of the COVID-19 recession.

Moody's said the federal government's "substantial policy response is helping viable companies to survive the related shock to demand and to avoid the destruction of productive capacity".

"Stimulus in response to the coronavirus outbreak does not significantly threaten fiscal strength over the longer term," its report said.

"Rather, the package highlights Australia's flexibility and capacity to use fiscal policy to support its credit profile in a difficult global economic -environment." But Moody's warned that "a major driver of Australia's potential growth rate will be the extent to which productivity growth picks up from the relatively weak levels experienced before the pandemic" - underlining the need for further policy reform as the economy transitions off emergency income support.

A loss of the nation's AAA rating would result in the government having to pay more for its debt.

The update from Moody's came as the Australian sharemarket rallied to be near where it started the year at after Wall Street's blue-chip index reached historic heights.

Australia's key stockmarket benchmark, the ASX 200, broke through 6700 points in early trade on Wednesday before finishing 0.5 per cent stronger at 6683 points - just shy of the 6684.1 points it was at when 2020 began.

On the US market, the Dow Jones index broke through 30,000 points for the first time, underpinned by the trio of successful vaccine trials announced in recent weeks.

Market sentiment was also boosted by outgoing President Donald Trump's decision to co-operate with a transition of power to President-elect Joe Biden.

The ASX has given investors a wild ride in 2020.

It surged in the early months of the year to hit a record close of 7162.5 points in late February.

It then plunged 36 per cent as COVID-19 became a pandemic, then rose steadily as interest rates were slashed and government's across the globe unleashed unprecedented spending.

CommSec analyst James Tao said the ASX 200 had staged "quite a recovery" since late February and was tracking to post its best November in 32 years.

Among the gainers on Wednesday was Woodside Petroleum, which rose 2.96 per cent to $23.31, Santos, which gained 2.67 per cent to $6.53, Origin Energy, which put on 3.96 per cent to $5.25 and Whitehaven Coal jumped 10.7 per cent to $1.55.

ANZ lifted 3 per cent to $23.66, Commonwealth Bank appreciated 1.49 per cent to $82.37, National Australia Bank strengthened 3.09 per cent to $24.05 and Westpac advanced 2.15 per cent to $20.89.

Rio Tinto added 1.12 per cent to $104.28, BHP lifted 3.03 per cent to $39.46 and Fortescue was up 2.82 per cent at $18.60.

Gold stocks retreated again after being among the worst performers on Tuesday. THE AUSTRALIAN
---
Joy as 40,000 fans lap up a grand final which beat pandemic odds

THE greatest thing about last night's grand final was not the game itself but the fact that it was played at all.

And the man behind that was not wearing a jersey on the pitch but a suit in the 40,000-strong crowd - Australian Rugby League chairman Peter V'landys.

"In March it looked like there was every chance we wouldn't be having a grand final," Sydney Cricket Ground Trust chairman Tony Shepherd said.

"I think we have got to recognise that the NRL under Peter V'landys leadership has done an outstanding job.

"But it would not have been possible without the co-operation of the NSW Government and its key ministers and their sensible and pragmatic approach." An elated Storm captain Cameron Smith struck a sombre note in his first post match interview, underscoring the incredible sacrifice of players who signed up to COVID safe bubbles, their teammates replacing their families.

The players devoted themselves to the game and in doing so lifted fans from the worst days of the pandemic to find joy again in live sport.

Smith wished he could hug his wife and children, as did other celebrating players last night but it was not to be.

"It was a special effort given what everyone has been through this year," Smith said.

"We haven't been home for five months, with the conditions that we have been under it is a remarkable effort to be here tonight and to get a victory.

He later added: "We haven't slept in our own beds for five months and in the past 80 days we have been out of our accommodation twice and we turn up every day with a great attitude and being resilient. Thank you to our families for the sacrifices you have made." Ryan Papenhuyzen won the Clive Churchill medal and dedicated it to the people of Melbourne, now well into months of lockdown.

Panthers Captain James Tamou paid tribute to Mr V'landys as the man who got the game back amid the pandemic and he also recognised the sacrifice of the Storm players who were forced to flee their state when COVID-19 resurged there.

The V'landys approach weighed the considerable risks of the virus against the benefits to the economy, the code and the morale of Australians and he pushed to let the season go ahead safely.

When Mr V'landys first announced that teams would run out onto the pitch on May 28 he was met with howls of criticism.

In defiance of the critics the season restarted - one of the first sports in the world to resume play. But it was not achieved without sacrifice.

The players have been in strict biosecurity bubbles - unable to visit cafes, pubs, restaurants or beaches.

For Penrith superstar Nathan Cleary that has meant his mum has not been able give her son a hug for four months. "You just want to give them a big hug but you can't touch them," she said ahead of last night's final.

But that is not about to change with Cleary going straight into State of Origin commitments with his NSW teammates that do not end until November 18.

It has also impacted the players' families. The family of Penrith ball runner Viliame Kikau would have normally been at ANZ Stadium but COVID-19 restrictions mean they are stuck at home in the tiny village of Bau in Fiji.

Next season may be no different. Last week the game's COVID expert, Doctor David Heslop, warned clubs that they could be kicking off in the same bubbles with a vaccine unlikely to be available before the middle of the year.

However last night, in the rain, none of that mattered to the lucky 40,000 fans who were able to attend. Among the first through the gate were Panthers fans Dale Cunliffe, his son Preston, sister Aimee, niece Riley Brooks and mother Sharon.

"We're over the moon the game was allowed to take place, it was almost looking like the government was going to cancel the NRL," he said.

"We're just glad that the NRL hadn't been shut down, I was here when the Panthers won the finals in 2003 and I'm here now- no amount of rain or COVID would have stopped me being here.

"The atmosphere might not be charged like before, but we as a family are - we're die hard Panther supporters." Mum Jenna Douglas battled heavy traffic and rain from the Blue Mountains with her daughter Lyla, 11, and sons Jasper, 14, and Wilson, 16, to catch a glimpse of the Panthers four hours before the 7.30pm kick-off.

"The grand final is the grand final, we're amazed but relieved the grand final was given permission to go ahead and we're all excited to be part of it," she said. Sydney based Storm supporters made up for those stuck at home, turning swathes of the stands purple.
---
The NRL clubs hold the whip hand in player negotiations as the world health pandemic and doubts over the salary cap make it a buyer's market, writes Fatima Kdouh

Almost 100 off-contract players' futures remain uncertain - including Josh Addo-Carr, Benji Marshall and the Morris twins - as they prepare to flood the open market at the end of the season as the COVID-19 pandemic creates a buyer's market for clubs.

Most NRL clubs aren't rushing to sign free agents and fill the spots in their 30 rosters for next season.

It means many off-contract players face a nervous wait over the summer. The NRL and RLPA have agreed in-principle to retain clubs' 30-man rosters for 2021, with two to four development players, and have advised clubs to work towards that number.

However, a looming reduction in the salary cap will trigger a flurry of off-season movement - meaning as well as free agents, a host of contracted players are likely to have new clubs for 2021.

"It really is a buyer's market at the moment with all the uncertainty," one NRL player manager said.

"Clubs are saying 'this is what we are offering, take it or leave it'. Then you have players who, because of COVID, haven't been able to play reserve grade this year." Warriors recruitment guru Peter O'Sullivan said the uncertainty around the make-up of next season's squad sizes had left clubs wary ahead of the usual off-season transfer frenzy.

"The mooted change to the roster size from 30 has led to clubs being conservative in approaching the market," O'Sullivan said.

"But I don't think roster sizes should be in any way decreased. You look at the numbers clubs have had to use this year, it's far in excess of 30 so you can't decrease it. That is only going to exacerbate the problem or the struggle that these free agents are facing to secure their future." Further muddying the waters is the lack of a second tier, with both the NSW and Queensland Cup competitions called off for 2020.

"There are some good players that I haven't seen play in over a year, so making decisions on those players is difficult enough and if you haven't seen them play it makes it impossible to sign them," O'Sullivan said.

"It's a matter of out of sight, out of mind. The big thing for me over the years has been watching the NSW and Queensland Cup semi-finals because the best players in that arena are first graders. Players like Lachlan Burr played at the Bulldogs and was part of their grand final-winning side two years ago and was the best player through that grand final series. Toby Rudolf is in that same boat. Without reserve grade you don't see players like that so you can't sign them."

THE GREAT Melbourne captain Cameron Smith, the NRL's record holder for most games, headlines an unprecedented free agency list as he contemplates retirement or creating a tug-of-war between the Storm and the Brisbane Broncos.

While Smith is likely to retire, his final decision will have a direct impact on the futures of Storm pair Brandon Smith and Harry Grant. After a breakthrough season at Wests Tigers, Grant and would not be prepared to wait for an opportunity at Melbourne. Brandon Smith has made it clear he sees himself as an 80-minute hooker. If forced to play second fiddle to Grant, he could be on a lookout for a new home, with the likes of Canterbury keen.

ORIGIN STAR Josh Addo-Carr, who remains contracted to Melbourne until the end of 2021, is desperate to return to Sydney on compassionate grounds.

But things are at a standstill because the Storm will only release him if they can land a suitable replacement for the NSW Origin winger.

While the Wests Tigers' interest in electric winger Addo-Carr appears to have cooled, South Sydney is being mooted as an option, depending on the future of teenage sensation Joseph Suaalii.

SONS OF GUNS Rising playmaker Tristan Sailor is set to make the biggest decision of his young career.

The Daily Telegraph understands Parramatta are interested in Sailor, the son of former Broncos and Wallabies legend Wendell Sailor. But the Eels will have to fend off interest from at least two other clubs, including Canterbury and Wests Tigers. Sailor, who headlines a list of almost 100 players unsigned for season 2021 after being let go by St George Illawarra, has emerged as one of the hottest free agents on the market.

Cooper Johns: The son of Matthew Johns made his NRL debut in Round 20 and is likely to stay at Melbourne in season 2021.

Albert and Jamil Hopoate: The sons of Manly legend John Hopoate are facing very different future prospects. While Jamil's future at Brisbane is uncertain, Albert is in negotiations to stay at Manly but the Warriors are keeping a close eye on proceedings.

YOUNG & RESTLESS With next season's $9.9 million salary cap to shrink anywhere between five to 10 per cent, players who are likely to make up the last five places in the top 30 roster are facing the prospect of accepting less money.

Alex Seyfarth: The Tigers are at risk of letting another talented youngster slip through their fingers in the same fashion the club lost Ryan Papenhuyzen, Addo-Carr, James Tedesco and Aaron Woods. The under-18s and 20s NSW Blues forward is in negotiations but the Concord club is yet to lock him in for 2021.

Adam Keighran: The Roosters have shown some early interest in the New Zealand Warriors five-eighth but talks are not likely to progress until after the finals series.

Danny Levi: The former Newcastle and Manly hooker, who has played 103 NRL games, has fielded interest from several Sydney clubs but is yet to receive a formal offer for season 2021.

THE HIGH-PROFILE STARS Jordan Rapana: It is understood the flyer had leapfrogged Addo-Carr as a target at the Tigers but now looks set to stay in Canberra.

Benji Marshall: The Tigers great generated interest from two non-Sydney outfits and has a full-time Fox League gig on the table but is likely to make a decision about his future in the next two weeks.

Josh and Brett Morris: The veteran backs are both eager to play on in season 2021 and the Roosters are just as keen to have them on the roster.

ON THE FRINGE It is understood Parramatta is set to farewell forward David Gower, while the future of the club's longest current-serving player, Peni Terepo, is unclear as he deals with health issues around epilepsy.

Nathan Peats: The former NSW Blues hooker won't be at the Gold Coast in 2021 and could be a target for Bulldogs coach Trent Barrett, who is searching for a playmaker and to add more experience to his roster.

Richie Kennar: The centre has a place in new Brisbane coach Kevin Walter's roster but is testing the market before making a final call.

Drew Hutchison: The 25-year played five games in an injury-ravaged Roosters outfit in season 2020. While there is a chance Hutchinson remains at Bondi, the playmaker is open to joining another rival where there would be more opportunities to play regular first grade.

Cameron King: The Sharks hooker will return from an ACL injury next year for the Townsville Blackhawks after agreeing to join the Intrust Super Cup outfit.

NORTHERN LIGHTS Manly's Joel Thompson and Greg Inglis have signed contracts to play in England, while Eels playmaker Jai Field also looks to have secured a deal overseas, where the speedster is set to link up with the Wigan Warriors.

Ricky Leutele: Melbourne have shown interest in keeping the premiership-winning centre but any decision will be delayed until Toronto Wolfpack, where Leutele is contracted, has its own future sorted.

PLAYERS OFF CONTRACT IN 2020 BRONCOS Jamil Hopoate, Jordan Kahu, Richie Kennar, Rhys Kennedy, Issac Luke, Sean O'Sullivan, Ben Te'o, Ilikena Vudogo.

CANBERRA Sebastian Kris, Michael Oldfield, Jordan Rapana, Kurt Baptiste.

CANTERBURY Jack Cogger, Tim Lafai, Marcelo Montoya, Aiden Tolman, Sauaso Sue, Isaiah Tass.

CRONULLA Mawene Hiroti, Kayleb Milne, Scott Sorensen, Brayden Trindall.

GOLD COAST Dale Copley, Keegan Hipgrave, Nathan Peats, Tyrone Roberts, Sam Stone.

MANLY Albert Hopoate, Luke Metcalf, Samuel Smith, Danny Levi, Brendan Elliott, Tony Williams.

KNIGHTS Brodie Jones, Josh King, Mason Lino, Tautau Moga, Tyronne Roberts-Davis, Connor Watson.

PARRAMATTA Rhys Davies, David Gower, George Jennings, Jaeman Salmon, Will Smith, Brad Takairangi, Peni Terepo.

SYDNEY ROOSTERS Jake Friend, Drew Hutchison, Matt Ikuvalu, Lachlan Lam, Brett Morris, Josh Morris, Sonny Bill Williams.

PANTHERS Caleb Aekins, Dean Blore, Tyrone May, Braydon McGrady, Malakai Watene-Zelezniak.

ST GEORGE ILLAWARRA Jacob Host, Joe Lovodua, Tristan Sailor, Kaide Ellis.

WESTS TIGERS Sam McIntyre, Alex Seyfarth, Benji Marshall, Oliver Clark, Matt Eisenhuth, Elijah Taylor, Robert Jennings, Dylan Smith.

SOUTH SYDNEY Tom Amone, Cory Denniss, Kurt Dillon, Patrick Mago, Ky Rodwell.

WARRIORS Lachlan Burr, Patrick Herbert, Gerald Beale, Nathaniel Roache, Leivaha Pulu, Adam Keighran, Isaiah Papali'i, Peta Hiku, King Vuniyayawa.

NORTH QUEENSLAND John Asiata, Tom Opacic, Daniel Russell, Javid Bowen.

STORM Josh Addo-Carr (contracted until 2021 but negotiating a release), Sandor Earl, Cooper Johns, Max King, Brenko Lee, Ricky Leutele, Marion Seve, Cameron Smith, Christian Welch.

GRAND TOTAL: 97
---
THE NRL was left red-faced last night after Broncos stars Darius Boyd and Jack Bird were exposed defying social distancing rules as Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk ticked off on the season's return.

Boyd and Bird were filmed having lunch together in New Farm Park only hours before Palaszczuk declared Queensland's borders would open to the NRL on the proviso the game did not pose a threat to the state's quest to beat COVID-19.

The NRL was plunged into crisis this week when Origin players Latrell Mitchell, Josh Addo-Carr and Nathan Cleary were busted breaking isolation protocols. Palaszczuk backed the NRL's May 28 season kick-off, but warned ARLC chairman Peter V'landys that Queensland would withdraw its support if the NRL threatened the state's encouraging results.

"I said I was as keen as anyone else to see the NRL return and I meant it," she said. "The only condition was that it did not put our excellent work containing the spread of COVID-19 at risk and the Chief Health Officer advises that the NRL plan is workable." V'landys guaranteed the players would follow strict biosecurity rules and adhere to government guidelines.

"We won't let the Queensland Premier down," V'landys said.

"The players will be given our full biosecurity plan in the coming days and with the education they will be given, I have faith in them to follow the rules. I'm sure the players realise they cannot stuff up again and the repercussions if they do." Just hours later, the NRL was forced to deal with the Broncos issue, a spokesman telling The Saturday Telegraph the game was seeking further information on the matter.

With restrictions easing from Saturday in Queensland, it is unlikely Boyd and Bird will be sanctioned for their park meet-up, but the timing couldn't have been worse with the NRL needing to stay squeaky clean in the coming months.

The Broncos claimed Boyd had been supporting Bird, who is still on crutches as he recovers from a season-ending knee reconstruction.

"Darius Boyd has been meeting with Jack Bird to provide mentoring and support after Jack suffered another season-ending knee injury," the Broncos said."Jack has undergone reconstructive surgery on the knee, the second time on the same knee in the past 12 months, and has been encouraged by the club to meet regularly with Darius."
---
Questions for a nation in denial Sharri Markson (China's sneaky move, column 16/5) is quite right in her assertions about China's role in this absolutely awful pandemic that is reeking disaster on the world.

The question is why won't China let the WHO and other world health bodies investigate the source of this pandemic which after all started there?

Why did China allow International flights (not domestic) to leave Wuhan when they knew how deadly this virus was?

Why does the Chinese government continue to deny responsibility for the pandemic?

Having destroyed the economies of the world, having the virus kill 300,000 people worldwide, you would think they would be contrite not show this arrogance along with this attitude to get even with any country that might question their actions.

What makes it worse is that some within the ABC and Nine newspapers appear to have become apologists for China.

John Kelly, Koolewong

Australia must unite and stand up to trade bully Thank you James Morrow for your excellent and timely response to China's miserable and dishonest handling of the COVID-19 pandemic (Buy together or die together, column 16/5).

I was shocked to read that only 68 per cent of Australians "feel less favourable to China's system of government".

I would have expected it would be much closer to 100 per cent, given the enormity of the devastation caused by this global pandemic.

Unfortunately, there are apparently politicians and party followers of the CCP ideologies that perhaps accounts for the shortfall - democracy does come at a price.

Australians must unite and defend our hard fought for values and say "up yours" to China's tariff threats and standover tactics to deflect their undeniable accountability.

Graeme Hodder, Callala Bay

Support for new outfits Regarding the trade boycott threats from China, fellow Aussies look through your household and what do you see is the origin of most of the products "made in China".

I have a suggestion - you must have sufficient clobber in your household to last for some time. Just boycott the People's Republic of China by not purchasing any of the products made there.

There are many other countries manufacturing clothes etc such as Bangladesh or India and numerous others that would no doubt be glad to break into our markets. Give them a fair go and see how the communists like that.

Robert Lee, Worrowing Heights

Oops, Labor slips up The Labor Party has been supporting anti-bullying in the workplace for years, however its leadership now appears to be supporting China who is the bully in the playground (Labor's great wall, 15/5).

Australia must take a stance and stand up for our country as the bullying will only get worse.

China has used stealth and has quietly infiltrated this country until one day, oops, we are no longer in charge.

JA Jones, Tea Gardens

When 'loony left' is right Forget COVID-19 … this is serious. For the very first time in my 74 years on Planet Earth, I find myself in complete agreement with the utterances of well-known left-wingers including Bill Shorten, Deb O'Neill, The Australian Workers' Union and, disturbingly, Penny Wong (Labor's great wall, 15/5).

Their call for Australia to "hold its nerve" against China's call to threaten our county with trade sanctions if we pursue our call for an international inquiry into the Chinese government's role in COVID-19, is to be applauded.

It does cause one to reconsider one's perception when some in what I consider the loony left are making a kind of sense.

Alan, Umina Beach

Under cloudless skies Kudos to Adella Beaini for her story and Justin Lloyd for his picture of twins Katie and Amy Glasgow in Saturday's Telegraph (Twins who always book their rides, 16/5).

Wide-open spaces, horses, cloudless sapphire blue skies and two fresh-faced girls who love their uncluttered lives.

What could possibly make us love Australia any more than we do? Lee Du Bray, Sydney

Jaws of a dilemma A young man climbs scaffolding to gain entry into the Australian Museum in the early hours of the morning (Hunt for bonehead in brazen night at the museum, 16/5). While in there he takes selfies, one with his head in the jaws of a T-Rex skeleton.

Fossicking around ancient artefacts and old bones and samples might seem an extreme way to pass the time in this pandemic time but he was acting alone so he can't be nabbed on the social-distancing issue. But, he was dressed in double denim, that should be a crime in itself.

I wonder if he will resist the urge to post his pictures on Facebook and if his friends will dob him in. If so the police will pay him a visit and he'll be history. Funny that.

Marg Swindells, Castle Hill

Grate expectations "Prepare for the worst, expect the best, take what comes with a smile" is a great adage for Australians to reflect on.

I am not sure that coronavirus would apply to this adage but the Australian government has certainly done its best, after preparing for the worst with the help of Aussies taking what comes with a "smile".

I hope the smile lasts when we see the end results of JobKeeper and Jobseeker. Janice Russell, Malua Bay

Origin to come at end Now that the NRL has created a precedent to hold the State of Origin at the end of the 2020 season due to the COVID-19, I suggest that all future Origin competitions be held at the end of the normal club competition.

The club competition should have priority over State of Origin. NRL fans want their teams to concentrate on winning the competition, with no breaks for the State of Origin.

John Guider, Bateau Bay

Briefly …

The Communist Party of China should heed their own advice in quoting President Abraham Lincoln (Lincoln a tool for the latest PRC fools, 16/5). "You cannot fool all the people all the time." The Chinese people may finally wake up to their regimen … as the people of Hong Kong have done.

Erich, Glen Alpine "" " Notice the reports on how clear the atmosphere is in the Northern Hemisphere. Yet their coal-fired power stations have been chugging away. Seems the pollution problem is more about 1.2 billion motor vehicles and 25,000 commercial planes than the demon coal.

Doug, Port Macquarie "" " Wanting to go soft on China is why Anthony Albanese has again shown he is not up to running the country (Labor's great wall, 15/5).

G Hutton, Saratoga "" " The stance taken by some Labor parliamentarians on China proves without courage, wisdom bears no fruit (Labor's great wall, 15/5).

Simon A Pijaca, Glenhaven "" " When the world is back to normal and world travel is permitted, I believe Australia should send our PM and his family on a two-week holiday due to his fantastic efforts in steering us through these troubled times. Hawaii would be nice. Maybe also send (at NSW's expense) Shane Fitzsimmons and his family for his bushfire efforts.

Denis, Eagle Vale "" " Can't believe the number of people resisting the COVIDSafe app. A chance to save a life - maybe even their own. I have found that resisters are generally those known as narks.

Cookie, Sawtell

HAVE YOUR SAYMAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
EXCLUSIVE - NINE BOSS ENJOYS LANGUID LUNCH WITH EA AS OPPONENTS CIRCLE

FOLLOWING a roller- coaster four years in the job, some members of Nine Entertainment's board are now pushing openly for the removal of company CEO Hugh Marks.

In a week in which "Hollywood Hugh" Marks addressed Nine investors and indicated the media company is ready to cut ties with embattled long-time sports partner the NRL, Nine insiders spoke about rising panic within the company.

Executives and board directors alike have become increasingly concerned about Nine's revised business strategy under Marks, which sees it move away from the free-to-air broadcaster's grassroots television audience, and the CEO's lack of attention to longstanding business alliances.

Former Fairfax publishing executive Chris Janz, Nine's chief digital and publishing officer, is currently favoured as Marks' replacement.

Former Nine CEO David Gyngell is also rated an outside chance of returning to the company for a third time to lift plummeting morale borne of what internal sources call Marks' remote and spreadsheet-obsessed management style.

There are also concerns his lack of industry pedigree is starting to be evident in his business decisions, something that makes TV-hardened Gyngell an attractive alternative even in the short term.

Gyngell and TV presenter wife Leila moved to Byron Bay after he quit the TV landscape but friends say they are reconsidering their home base as they begin evaluating school options for children Ted, now seven, and Gwendolen, almost six.

Yet despite the threatened coup, Marks put rumbling dissent - and month-on-month declining revenue - aside on Wednesday to treat his attentive executive assistant to a picnic in a Sydney park.

Marks and his EA Jane Routledge stretched out in the sun at a Clifton Gardens park, laughing easily during a long, languid lunch.

The newly separated media executive lay down on the grass and relaxed during their first public sighting since reports of Marks's growing reliance on his EA first leaked from inside the Nine bunker six months ago.

Dressed casually in jeans, runners and polo shirt and carrying fish and chips from nearby Balmoral Beach takeaway Bottom of the Harbour, Marks arrived on foot about 2pm for the lunch with mother-of-two Routledge.

According to TV sources, the blonde, who has a reputation for being hyper protective of her boss when the pair are ensconced in Nine's Willoughby office, has been accompanying Marks on out-of-office expeditions since January 2019 when the pair were sighted together at an Australian Open reception in Melbourne.

In November Marks confirmed he had separated from his wife of more than two decades, Gayle, mother of his four children.

"This is a private family matter and a painful time for us all. Please respect our privacy and in particular that of our children," he told this newspaper.

A Nine spokeswoman maintained that despite the separation, Marks continued to live in the family home in Artarmon with his wife and younger children, the youngest of whom is believed to be about 13, and asked for the report to be held over to give the couple time to sell their family home.

Marks has emphatically denied being in a relationship with his EA. Soon after, Marks quit the family home and moved into a rental house in nearby Mosman.

The CEO, whose remuneration in the year to June 2019 was $3.2 million and who owns $3.2 million in Nine shares at the current $1.40 market price (up a bolshie $1.2 million from $1.9 million following his NRL-related advice to the ASX on March 30 when Nine shares were trading at 86c), has spent recent months selling off family assets including a luxury retreat near Berry which sold in February for more than $4 million.

Two weeks ago, on April 21, he handed over 216,216 Nine shares - valued at $250,800 - to his estranged wife Gayle, a lawyer, as part of the couple's divorce.

Routledge, in the meantime, has quit the family home she previously shared with husband Kit and two daughters in Frenchs Forest.

British migrant Routledge joined Nine in November 2015, the same month Marks started in the CEO role, after quitting her job at Warner Bros Australia to work for Marks, a grandson of high-end Sydney jeweller Percy Marks, and before 2015 the boss of TV distribution company Southern Star Group.

A Nine spokeswoman said the pair were on a working lunch. It was a nice day and they had fish and chips in the park, the spokeswoman said.

Tied to the loss of confidence by some in Marks - on whose watch a 60 Minutes crew had to be rescued from a jail in Beirut in 2016, the Today show's ratings have collapsed and Nine's digital strategy has changed and changed again - is the loss of confidence in Nine chairman Peter Costello, former federal treasurer and Liberal MP.

Costello outraged journalists within Nine's merged "always independent" Fairfax ranks last year by supporting a $10,000-a-head Liberal Party fundraiser at Nine HQ.

His support of 2GB broadcaster Alan Jones despite the collapse of revenue in Nine's newly acquired radio division, had also caused deep division within Nine's executive.

Veteran media war dog Nick Falloon, currently Nine's deputy chairman and a former Nine CFO, is favoured to replace Costello.

As chairman of Fairfax Media, Falloon was one of the architects of the 2018 $4 billion Nine-Fairfax merger and is one of the most seasoned players in the current media landscape.

Having gambled against the early recovery of Nine's long-time broadcast partner the NRL in March, when Marks informed the ASX Nine stood to make $130 million in savings with the COVID-19 cancellation of NRL games, the Nine CEO told a Macquarie investor conference on Tuesday the media company had "agreed to nothing this year" concerning NRL broadcast rights. The advice was a slap in the face to the NRL which for three decades has bolstered Nine's bottom line with its rugby league State of Origin series, traditionally three of the top 10 highest rating TV events of the free-to-air calendar year.Insiders say "Hollywood Hugh's" decision to put the NRL on notice has dumbfounded Nine stalwarts coming, as it does, just two years after Marks raised eyebrows during broadcast rights negotiations with Cricket Australia. Nine lost the cricket rights when it was outmanoeuvred by Seven and Fox Sports, bringing to an end Nine's 40-year history with a game that has long been part of the broadcaster's DNA, something for which Kerry Packer was prepared to risk bankruptcy to acquire for his Nine Network.
---
SNAPPING UP THE TALENT BRAITH Anasta has signed up his first talent as a rugby league player manager. Lachlan Ilias, 19, is a former Australian Schoolboys rugby union star and a backline utility at South Sydney. He's also played in Australia's Youth Sevens team.

The youngster has played league for NSW under-16s as well and Anasta is in talks with the Rabbitohs about Ilias's future at Redfern.

There is also talk of Melbourne Storm winger Josh Addo-Carr being keen to join Anasta's stable.

Addo-Carr had a falling out with his agent Gavin Orr before Orr was banned for two years by the NRL integrity unit.

ALLIANZ REBUILD AHEAD OF SCHEDULE HERE'S the proof that work is finally under way on the foundations for the new Allianz Stadium at Moore Park - and the massive engineering project is even ahead of schedule.

The fact no sport is being played next door at the SCG due to the COVID-19 sporting lockdown means builders don't have to stop working on event days.

Infrastructure NSW has also extended building work on Saturdays from 7am to 6pm to help stimulate the economy.

It is hoped the 45,000-seater will be ready to host State of Origin in 2022.

SPINNER'S BOSS LOSS IT has been a tough week for highly regarded media minder Daniel Meers. Meers used to work as chief media adviser to Malcolm Turnbull, the ex-PM who has copped a pasting and threats of being banned for life from the Liberal Party over the release of his new book.

Meers left the PM's office when ScoMo took the top job and found a new gig at NRL headquarters as Todd Greenberg's head of spin. He will stay on to work for Andrew Abdo.

SAM SITS IN RETIRED Rabbitohs superstar and Fox Sports commentator Sam Burgess is so highly regarded by NRL executives that he has been invited to sit in on Project Apollo meetings at Moore Park headquarters. Alongside RLPA boss Clint Newton, Burgess has offered useful advice about player-related issues in the countdown to the resumption of play on May 28.

T20 TO BE BOUNCED UNTIL 2021

THERE is very strong mail the T20 World Cup will be postponed until February, by which time our borders are more than likely to be opened for international visitors.

The tournament is scheduled from October 18 to November 15 in Australia. Channel 9 has the broadcast free-to-air rights and has been using it as an excuse to try to stop the NRL competition from going into late October and November.

The move to February next year would allow the NRL to play the grand final at the SCG and also allow for the ANZ Stadium refurbishment to begin in late July instead of being held back to host the premiership decider.

WRONG FLIGHT THE poor old NRL can't take a trick. During the off-season, the game dumped a long-time arrangement with Qantas to switch to Virgin Airlines, the same carrier as the AFL.

Virgin has since gone bust and into voluntary administration. When the competition resumes, out-of-town teams will be travelling on chartered jets.But at some stage when things get back to normal, acting CEO Andrew Abdo will have to find a new airline deal - and possibly go cap in hand back to Qantas.
---
NSW Rugby League boss Dave Trodden has welcomed the chance to host an entire State of Origin campaign in Sydney this year, saying: "We won't have the same issues as Queensland."

Only 24 hours after the Queensland Government turned its back on this year's interstate series, planning is already under way for Western Sydney to play host.

The move comes after Deputy Premier John Barilaro met on Tuesday morning with ARLC chairman Peter V'landys, NRL CEO Todd Greenberg and Project Apollo head Wayne Pearce.

Speaking afterwards, Barilaro said he would be "cheering" for the Harbour City to make history in hosting all three games, especially with Blues coach Brad Fittler looking to earn a series three-peat.

Earlier this week, Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk -effectively put Origin up for tender when she sensationally ruled Brisbane out of hosting games during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Enter the NSWRL, which will have the heavyweight backing of Barilaro inside government.

"Origin is definitely on this year," Trodden said. "And if the Queenslanders don't want to play any games up there - or can't - we're more than happy to host the entire series.

"The pleasing thing for us is that we won't have the same issues as Queensland. "There seems to be a far greater willingness (from government) for Origin to happen in Sydney than has been expressed up there." Under one proposal, Maroons coach Kevin Walters and his players would be based in Penrith for all three Origin camps, accommodated at the Mercure hotel while training out of Panthers Academy.

Elsewhere, and in the case of an Origin lockout, Bankwest Stadium is already firming to play host.

The Blues also have a strong supporter in Barilaro, who is advocating on behalf of the NRL with various state government officials, including Premier Gladys Berejiklian.

Quizzed on playing an entire Origin series in Sydney, the lifelong Manly fan said: "If we follow health advice and the NRL has proper protocols in place, I'd be cheering for NSW to host all three Origin games." Apart from ruling Queensland out as an Origin host this week, Premier Palaszczuk expressed concern at her state's three NRL sides - Brisbane, Gold Coast and North Queensland - potentially shifting south to play out of an NRL bubble.

"Which surprised me," Trodden said. "Because everyone in rugby league is really conscious of the public health issues.

"Nobody wants to be blase about it, and I don't think we are. When we talk about wanting to play footy again, it's implicit in that desire that we only want to play in circumstances where it is safe to do so. Nobody wants to put anyone at risk.

"And if you take that as the working assumption - that we are going to play in safe circumstances - it surprises me that people would put obstacles in the way rather than trying to make it happen." The NSWRL has offered up its $30 million Centre of Excellence to interstate teams, which could live and train out of an Olympic Park "bubble" in coming months. As for the Queensland Origin side?

"I don't think they'd want to use it," Trodden said. "There are plenty of other alternatives, some of which have already been canvassed, including the use of Panthers Academy.

"I'm sure the Queenslanders would be far more comfortable in something that is exclusively their own. Which is why the Penrith option would likely appeal to them." Bankwest Stadium is also the early favourite to host should the Origin series be played without fans."Although, priority No.1 is when we play the three games," Trodden said.
---
1980 When the full-time siren sounded that night, the scoreboard read Queensland 20 NSW 10 and there was jubilation up north. The annual match-up between the two state teams had long been very one-sided but in 1980 they had tried something new. Players were selected not by the state where they were currently playing senior rugby league, but according to what state they first played in.

The experiment was first tried on July 8, 1980,40 years ago today. It was so successful it established a yearly State of Origin competition, which this year has been held over until November because of COVID-19. But the interstate rivalry dated back much further, to 1908, when Queensland fielded its first rugby league team against NSW and copped a 43-0 thrashing. One Sydney sports writer pronounced them "the weakest lot of footballers I have even seen come down from Queensland".

Despite this, league became enormously popular in Queensland and the state gained in strength and took every series from 1922-26, and again in 1928, 1931 and 1932. But then there was only one series win in the '40s and two in the '50s before a period of Blues domination.

The Maroons' victory in 1959 was the last time they would win under the system that allowed ex-Queenslanders to play for NSW. Between 1960 and 1980, when State of Origin rules were introduced, Queensland won only 10 games out of 68.

Over the decades many Queenslanders went to play in the Sydney competition. There was more money and more prestige, and match-ups between the state sides usually showed Queensland to be inferior.

For decades it rankled Queensland that players who had begun in local teams ended up playing in the NSW team against fellow Queenslanders. The view persisted in the NSW rugby league that the Queensland league ran a second-rate competition but it was a first-rate nursery for up-and-coming NSW players.

Queenslander Paul Vautin once said he grew up "thinking there was something special about anyone who played in Sydney". Sydney teams were inclined to agree and there were complaints that matches against paltry Queensland sides were a waste of time.

But in the 1960s people began to call for a competition between two teams selected according to the state the footballers had originally played for. One of the first advocates was former Queensland representative Jack Reardon. In a 1964 newspaper article he said that spectators at a 41-3 caning of the Maroons by NSW had suggested Queensland be allowed to "call on their former players now with Sydney clubs". Most administrators, players and fans of NSW rugby league were against the idea. But interest among fans was waning by the late '70s and there were fears there was far more interest in watching the more powerful Queensland rugby union team beat the NSW rugby union side.

The head of the Queensland Rugby League at that time was Labor senator Ron McAuliffe. His brief football career playing for Brisbane's Northern Suburbs in the 1930s was cut short by World War II, when he served in the AIF in the Middle East and New Guinea. Initially he was sceptical about a State of Origin competition, thinking that forcing expats to play together as a state side might not create a team strong enough to beat NSW. But McAuliffe became convinced of the potential loyalty of an origin side by journalist Hugh Lunn, who told him: "There is no such thing as an ex-Queenslander, Ron. They're like Catholics. There's only ever lapsed Queenslanders." The origin concept had already worked well with Australian rules, when a West Australian side beat Victoria in 1977. This inspired Queensland businessman Barry Maranta to draw up a proposal for a league State of Origin contest. McAuliffe pitched the idea to NSW Rugby League boss Kevin Humphreys who, despite initial resistance, eventually got a trial approved. That game was to be played in 1980, as the third in a series, with the first two matches played under the usual selection rules.

For that third game, former Queenslander Arthur Beetson was selected as captain. Beetson, then 35, was one of that state's most successful league exports. Nearing the end of a glorious career, he had never played for Queensland and relished the opportunity to lead the team. The side also included a young Mal Meninga and Wally Lewis. McAuliffe told the players there was a $2000 bonus if they won.

They didn't disappoint. In front of a Queensland home crowd, in an exciting, sometimes violent match, a legend was born.
---
CHINA may have fudged its COVID-19 death figures by tens of thousands, according to figures which tracked crematory operations in Wuhan this year.

A study published on the preprint server medRxiv claims the official Chinese statistics on COVID-19 cases and the country's mortality rate were wildly out, with 36,000 deaths recorded by March instead of the official 2524 - with half a million people infected with the virus. The study looked at investigative media reports of crematory operations in Wuhan - the origin and -epicentre of the coronavirus pandemic.
---
IF COVID-19 hadn't hit, game one of State of Origin would've been played last Wednesday in Adelaide.

Instead, under the NRL's revised draw, we must wait until November 4 to see NSW and Queensland collide.

That's the best news Nathan Cleary could ever hear because, right now, Parramatta's Mitchell Moses is leading the marathon to wear the prized No.7 Blues jumper that Cleary wore in Origins I and II last year.

If NSW coach Brad Fittler had to pick his side tomorrow, Moses would be his seven from heaven.

That's the problem with missing games in the NRL, you're quickly forgotten. Loyalty can only last so long.

Cleary's two-game suspension for breaking the game's coronavirus -protocols has left him chasing form, -respect - and Moses.

Like the rest of us, the Panthers playmaker has watched the return of footy unfold from his living room - -albeit, hopefully by himself.

He would've watched the obvious -elevation of Moses' game in 2020 to a near-complete halfback highlight package of kick-control, intensity, energy, awareness and as Steve "Blocker" Roach said on Fox League last night, "a desire to always be in the game".

While there's still work to be done, Moses has finally found the balance of knowing when to pull the trigger and when to play safe.

Last night, he picked and prodded at the Manly defence, be it through his two tackle busts and offload, or a chip-and-chase to keep Manly fullback Tom Trbojevic thinking.

His 74th minute field goal to give the Eels a psychological edge was exactly what was required. The fact that Moses is combining with a 19-year-old rookie in Dylan Brown, speaks to the halfback's level of maturity and leadership of the Eels.

Make no mistake, Moses' direction of this quality Parramatta side is the very reason they wake this morning having achieved their best start to a season since 1989.

Fittler has always been a Moses fan having coached the precocious talent when representing Lebanon at the 2017 World Cup.

So impressed was he with Moses' ability to absorb pressure, when naturally Lebanon were outclassed by their NRL-stacked opponents, that Fittler claimed the now 25-year-old was "designed for State of Origin".

That was three years ago when Moses had played 67 NRL games for the Wests Tigers. Last night was game 134 of his career and 68 for the Eels.

He is now just four games away from becoming the first halfback to play more than 71 games in the Eels' No. 7 jumper since Peter Sterling retired 28 years ago.

His 69th game in the blue and gold comes on Friday night against Penrith. Over to you, Mr Cleary.
---
PARRAMATTA EELS V BRISBANE BRONCOS 7.50PM TONIGHT

FOOTY'S finally back and so are the fans - all 300 million of them watching in loungerooms around the world.

In what will be a watershed moment for rugby league, the NRL's stunning eight-game return over the next four days is set to be watched by a -record global TV audience of 300 million sport-starved people- in what is expected to be the largest TV ratings for a single round in the sport's 112-year history.

Industry insiders predict about 30 to 40 million people around the world would tune in to each bone-rattling match over the next four days as rugby league becomes the first football code in the -English-speaking world to -return to the playing fields and TV.

NRL matches will be shown in more than 70 countries, including the US, France, Britain, Papua New Guinea and Uganda.

At 7.50pm tonight when Brisbane and Parramatta kick off at Suncorp Stadium, rugby league will become just the third major sporting league in the world, along with football's K League in South Korea and Germany's Bundesliga, to resume post COVID-19.

Matches will also be shown in such far-flung countries as Nauru, Angola and The Netherlands-. Some countries have aired NRL games in recent years but matches have already been promoted heavily this week.

'UNIQUE OPPORTUNITY' The increase in viewership could not be accurately predicted but insiders believe it could be by as much as 40 to 50 per cent.

"There's certainly a unique opportunity to attract new fans to our game globally," acting NRL CEO Andrew Abdo said.

"While it has been the loyalty- of our fans here at home that has been driving us to resume the season, we will be one of only a few live sports around the world that will be playing in June and July.

"We know fans are craving live sport so we're excited about the global audience we could attract with the resumption of the competition and the exposure that will bring to our corporate partners.

"We are also expecting a strong take-up of the Watch NRL app which allows fans to stream games live throughout the world. It's a credit to our chairman Peter V'landys and the commission for their unwavering commitment to bring the game back on May 28." NRL officials hope to gain a slice of the massive US sports market during the shutdown of major codes including the NBA, and have already seen a spike in media interest. An article- on forbes.com this week was headlined: "Americans, this is why the NRL should be your new favourite sport." "Rugby league is the lesser-known but infinitely superior form of rugby and, if you like your sport high-octane, occasionally- violent, endlessly authentic and frequently spectacular, then you need to tune in this Thursday for National- Rugby League," it read.

"Rugby league is like watching the NFL, except after every down they immediately have to get up and do it again, with no break, and nobody wears padding."

A SIGNIFICANT SPIKE Ratings in coronavirus-hit England are also expected to spike significantly with Super League yet to recommence.

"About 80 to 90 million people would have access to the games in America and Europe-, maybe more," a TV source said. "From that you have to ask yourself how many would watch it.

"Many may not understand the game but they are craving live sport around the world right now.

"Australians are watching the Bundesliga. Why? Because it's the only live sport being shown. I would imagine about 30 to 40 million people would watch each game for longer than 15 minutes.

"That would be equivalent to watching one quarter of an NFL match. "Way back in 2011, State of Origin and the NRL grand final reached 40 million households in the US and 48 million through Europe.

"They might not come back when their preferred sport returns but, this weekend, they will be watching." The NRL has jumped back first ahead of the AFL and is the first sport to be played since March 23.

Despite the hype, Nine and Fox are reluctant to predict their NRL ratings in Australia for this round for fear they may fall short.

While fans will tune in, broadcasters will still have a challenge ahead to create the game-day atmosphere without supporters in the stands.

'GREAT TO BE BACK' Sydney Roosters coach Trent Robinson said ravenous sports fans around the world would tune into rugby league.

"There has been a lot of work from the NRL to get back on and we want to represent- our game well in some clear air space around the world," said Robinson.

"There has been some interest around rugby league from friends who live overseas. It will be good to get our game back on represented the right way. It's great to be back.

"We want to represent rugby league and there's no better game for us than Friday night's match against Souths to restart the season." Former NSW skipper and coach Laurie Daley knows the NRL cannot miss a wonderful opportunity: "This is a great chance to showcase our game to so many countries. We have known how great our game has been for years but now it's time for others to find out."

CANADA Despite trailing behind rugby, Canada has enjoyed a rugby league revival since 2010 thanks to the inclusion of the former NRL star-studded Toronto Wolfpack in the Super League competition BROADCASTER: ROGER SPORTS NET

IRELAND Ireland boasts a World Cup league team still growing in strength, as evidenced by their solid 2017 showing.

BROADCASTER: Fox Sports

FRANCE In much the same way as Canada, French league has made major inroads after the UK Super League's addition of the Catalans Dragons. BROADCASTER: BeIN Sports

USA League has had sporadic outings in the US, including the 1987 State of Origin in Long Beach and the 2018 Rugby League International Challenge between New Zealand and England in Denver. That match drew 19,320 fans but US viewers for tonight's game are expected to eclipse that figure by a long way. BROADCASTER: Fox Sports

UK The UK is currently a league powerhouse with the English Super League, but with the world's second-strongest comp still on hold amid the coronavirus crisis expect a massive spike in Brits tuning in for the NRL relaunch.

BROADCASTER: Skysports

AFRICA To be shown in 48 countries including Angola, Botswana, Congo Democratic Republic, Senegal, South Africa and Swaziland Despite being overshadowed slightly by South Africa's massive rugby union standing, French influence has led to the 13-man game flourishing in Gambia, Morocco, Nigeria and Ghana.

BROADCASTER: Fox Sports

PNG The home of the Kumuls boasts some of the most frenzied footy supporters in the world, with their strengthening national team bolstered by the PNG Hunters' inclusion in the Intrust Super Cup.

BROADCASTER: Digicel/SKY Pacific/ TVWAN - Digicel TV

SAMOA Another growing Pacific powerhouse, Samoa has long boasted a number of NRL and Super League players, such as Bronco Anthony Milford and Eel Junior Paulo, who will both face off against each other in tonight's season relaunch opener.

BROADCASTER: TV3/Sky Pacific

TONGA The tiny Polynesian country is punching well above its weight with a new wave of passionate fans, following the dizzying rise of the star-studded national team, the Mate Ma'a, who have now beaten all top tier countries, including Australia.

BROADCASTER: Digicel/Sky Pacific

FIJI Possibly only behind PNG in terms of passionate supporters, Fiji is also known as nursery for some of the NRL's biggest stars, such as Maika Sivo and Semi Radradra.

BROADCASTER: Fiji Broadcasting Corporation/Sky Pacific NRL also showing in: Cook Islands, Kiribati, Nauru, Niue, American Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, Vanuatu and Micronesia.

NEW ZEALAND Warriors fans may have had little to cheer about in recent years, but league fans across the ditch will still be able to take in the considerable Kiwi talent scattered across the rest of the NRL from tonight.

BROADCASTER: Sky Pacific

INFLIGHT/INSHIP Worldwide - excluding Australia, NZ and Pacific Islands BROADCASTER: Sport 24 STREAMING COVERAGE: Worldwide except for Australia, New Zealand & Pacific Islands
---
FOR the first time in a long time, State of Origin could become a full-blown audition for Kangaroos selection with Australia coach Mal Meninga pushing for a one-off Test match to be played at the end of this year.

To be played in the last week of November or first week of December, Meninga has spent the past week -canvassing the opinions of senior players who have backed his plan to finish 2020 with a Test match.

As a result of the re-modelled season which was altered after the COVID-19 shut-down, this year's State of Origin series will be played on November 4, 11 and 18 as opposed to during the middle of the season.

Traditionally, the Kangaroos have played a Test match before the mid-year State of Origin series.

But Meninga wants a Test match to be played after this Origin series - which would transform the state against state match into a genuine contest for Kangaroos -selection.

Meninga has spoken to Kangaroos captain Boyd -Cordner and Test stars Daly Cherry-Evans and Wade Graham this week to measure their interest in trying to organise a season-ending Test match, most likely against New Zealand.

The trio told Meninga they would be privileged to pull on the green and gold following a year like never before.

"I've been asking for their feedback on what they're -feeling based on what has been an extraordinary year," -Meninga said.

"On the back of a season and Origin as well, what would their appetite be on playing one more game at the end of the year?

"I feel it would be a very good way to finish off an -extraordinary year with an international game.

"I was very pleased to hear how eager they would be to play. "But the other thing that struck me with them was that the last time we played -together, we lost to Tonga, so the players are very focused on raising the level of -the Kangaroos jersey." Meninga agreed that the Test match would only place further impetus on the performance of players during the Origin series.

"When we look at picking our team, we've obviously put some criteria around values and behaviour," Meninga said.

"In no particular order, there's also loyalty, there's club form, there's the final series and there's Origin - they're the four criteria we look at. "But with Origin being at the end of the year, if we were to play a Test match after, our criteria is in order now which acknowledges that reward for effort and success through the year."
---
THE traditional mid-season State of Origin series could be under threat if NRL fans get their way.

The Origin series has long wreaked havoc with the NRL competition, diluting the quality of teams because it's played between matches over six weeks in the middle of the year.

But in the 2020 NRL Fans' Poll, produced in conjunction with nrl.com, fans have had enough and thrown support behind a stand-alone series.

More than 37 per cent of respondents backed playing the series after the regular season, while 34 per cent supported playing games during a stand-alone period in the middle of the year. Just 28 per cent of fans want to keep the traditional format of playing in between club rounds.

The COVID-19 lay-off has forced the NRL to reschedule this year's series to the end of the season for the first time.

Fans have given Queensland little hope of ending NSW's two-year winning streak - just 20 per cent voted for a Maroons series victory.

They did, however, give the Sunshine State a boost in regards to expansion when 52 per cent voted to increase the number of teams. Brisbane was the most favoured destination (23 per cent) ahead of Perth (21 per cent) and the NSW Central Coast (13 per cent).

The innovations introduced under ARL Commission chairman Peter V'landys' administration - the move back to one referee, the six-again rule and the captain's challenge - all got a big tick from the fans.

More than 81 per cent believed the six-again rule was good for the sport and 94 per cent want to retain the captain's challenge.

On the whole, fans' attitudes towards referees seem to be improving - 68 per cent rated their performance as a three out of five or higher.

The influence of the bunker proved to be a controversial topic. While 52.88 per cent of fans want it to be used less, 42 per cent want its powers to be expanded to allow for rulings on forward passes in try--scoring situations.

There was overwhelming support for the suburban ground policy change, giving hope to the likes of Brookvale Oval, Leichhardt Oval and Jubilee Oval for the future. More than 85 per cent of respondents backed the NRL's decision to develop suburban grounds instead of relocating matches to bigger stadiums.
---
China's lethally evasive communist government and its craven official enablers stand exposed by the coronavirus, and need some serious doses of legal justice

What did China know about the likelihood of unleashing a deadly coronavirus pandemic upon the world, and when did China know it?

Answers: a hell of a lot, and a hell of a long time ago.

The first intensely pathogenic human coronavirus, SARS, killed nearly 800 people between 2002 and 2004. A second outbreak, of the terrifyingly named severe acute diarrhoea syndrome coronavirus, or SADS, occurred in 2018 and wiped out 24,000 pigs.

"Both outbreaks began in China," experts from the Wuhan Institute of Virology and the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences concluded, "and were caused by coronaviruses of bat origin." The same experts also warned in March 2019: "It is generally believed that bat-borne CoVs will re-emerge to cause the next disease outbreak. In this regard, China is a likely hotspot.

"The challenge is to predict when and where, so that we can try our best to prevent such outbreaks." Stopping the sale of bats for human consumption might have been a good start. Instead, China's communist leaders did nothing.

Worse still, they sought to conceal the latest coronavirus outbreak. According to some reports, the first coronavirus case emerged on November 17 in Hubei province. Six days after the first Wuhan resident fell ill on December 10, local health officials made the connection between the disease and - surprise! - a bat-selling market in their city.

According to a timeline compiled by US news site Axios, authorities were not told about the new virus until December 27. Despite that alert, government officials still took little or no action - apart from reprimanding doctors who discussed the virus in an online chat room.

Oh, Wuhan also threw a big Lunar New Year banquet on January 18. You know, to give the coronavirus a chance to become acquainted with tens of thousands of people.

The evidence is in. China wilfully mishandled this matter prior to and during the current outbreak. To date, Chinese government inaction has led to the deaths of more than 11,000.

So, what happens next? Well, some may say that arresting Chinese President Xi Jinping and hauling him before a court in his jocks is unrealistically ambitious.

This is not the case. Arresting every single member of the Chinese Communist Party and charging them for decades of tyrannical barbarism - now, that's ambitious.

(In such a scenario, of course, sentence discounts would be permitted for those Chinese officials who so upset ex-PM Kevin Rudd during Copenhagen climate talks in 2010.) Encouragingly, there may be a means of bringing Jinping and other senior communists to justice.

"An argument could be made that just like support for terrorism, which is legally actionable, a government that engages in such reckless disregard and negligence and covers up an epidemic that has the potential to spread worldwide could be held legally liable," Israel-based lawyer Nitsana Darshan-Leitner told Fox News.

"Cover-ups and deliberate acts to conceal a deadly medical crisis are not (among) the protected acts of a sovereign state or of responsible leaders." Speaking of cover-ups, the UN's China-compliant World Health Organisation and its useless leader Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus deserve more than mere media criticism.

"The coronavirus pandemic has shown that Tedros is not fit to lead the WHO," academic Bradley Thayer and Lianchao Han, vice-president of Citizen Power Initiatives for China, wrote in a joint opinion piece.

"Because of his leadership, the world may have missed a critical window to halt the pandemic or mitigate its virulence." As China actively concealed the extent of the outbreak and silenced whistleblowers, Tedros praised Chinese "transparency". On January 14, the WHO repeated China's wild claim that the coronavirus was not contagious between humans.

And Tedros is still cheerleading for China all these weeks later. "For the first time, China has reported no domestic COVID19 cases yesterday," Tedros tweeted on Friday. "This is an amazing achievement, which gives us all reassurance that the coronavirus can be beaten." Anyone who believes anything from the Chinese government - about the coronavirus, climate change, last night's football results or the colour of the sky - is an idiot.

Tedros is an idiot whose China-abetting organisation happens to be substantially funded by Australia, among other nations. We may save some economy-rebuilding cash by ending that arrangement.

China does have other friends. Last week members of the reflexively anti-US media rounded on President Donald Trump after he referred to the "China virus".

"Why do you keep using this?" one reporter asked during a White House briefing last week. "A lot of people say it's racist." "Because it's from China," Trump calmly replied, pointing out later that China had at one point tried to pin responsibility for the origins of the virus on American soldiers.

"That can't happen. It's not gonna happen. Not as long as I'm president," Trump said. "It comes from China."As did the previous coronavirus outbreaks. As, most likely, will future coronavirus outbreaks.
---
We all know someone who is struggling at the moment. It may even be you. The mental health of our nation is like a beer belly bursting at the seams - one more knock and the button's going to pop.

At the beginning of the pandemic we were unified as we all came together to fight the unknown. At the start there was no blame, and the matter of who kept their jobs and who didn't felt like luck of the draw. We were homeschooling together, at arm's length from those we love and all adjusting to life in lockdown together.

But five months on and the cracks are starting to show… Many Australians are exhausted, anxious, flat and no longer interested in playing board games via Zoom on a Saturday night. It's become like State of Origin as we ease our way out of the pandemic at different times depending on our postcode.

In Victoria, families are at breaking point, back to online learning and the continual stress of working from home.

It's Groundhog Day, playgrounds are closed, catch-ups with friends out of the question and usual activities on hold.

Many Victorians I speak to say it's the indefinite nature of things that is the hardest. Not having things to look forward to or a definite date for when work may return to normal.

While the rest of the country is out of lockdown, nobody can breathe a sigh of relief just yet. The virus still looms, the financial pressures are building, the challenge for businesses to rebound if they can is enormous. Families are adjusting to life with one or even both parents losing income. We are trapped in our own state, unable to see the ones we love.

All of this is putting a huge strain on our mental health.

Calls to mental-health services have skyrocketed. That's a sign people are struggling. It's also a sign people are reaching out, and that's exactly what we need to do.

I've lost count of the number of people who have said they are struggling, but don't feel they can complain because there are others far worse off than them. There is a lot of guilt for those who still have jobs, who are healthy, who do have family to rely on or who live in a state where life is relatively normal again.

But diminishing our feelings is the worst thing we can do. Just as criticising people who at face value have nothing to complain about is not helpful either.

Everyone's circumstances are different.

It's not a competition and mental health doesn't discriminate. Yes, 2020 has been a sh*tshow, but we must find a way to keep moving forward. To put one foot in front of the other and hold out our socially distanced hand to those who are struggling, and bring them into the future with us.

Carrie co-hosts The Project, 6.30pm weeknights on Network 10, and Carrie & Tommy, 3pm weekdays on the Hit Network.

* For advice and strategies to help manage your wellbeing and mental health during the COVID-19 pandemic, contact the Beyond Blue Coronavirus Mental Wellbeing Support Service hotline on 1800 512 348. If you are experiencing a personal crisis or have suicidal thoughts, contact Lifeline on 13 11 14.
---
ON State of Origin night Bruce the Australian cattle dog will run out the kicking tee for the NSW team.

But behind the scenes, while the 10-week-old pup is being trained for his debut with the NSW Blues at Origin 1 in November, he'll also provide valuable support for troubled teens.

NSW coach Brad Fittler said Bruce optimises the NSW spirit as his team aims to become the first Blues outfit to win three series in a row since 2005.

"The blue heeler breed is distinctly Australian and also stands for all the same qualities that NSW players do: mateship, loyalty, discipline and work ethic," Fittler said.

"It's been a difficult season as we've battled bushfires, floods and now a global pandemic over COVID-19.

"They say a dog is man's best friend and Bruce will certainly be a best friend for the Blues and all our fans in these tough times." NSWRL head of commercial and digital Jodie Cross said: "We wanted an official team mascot that would help us to create a legacy for future generations of Blues supporters.

"We looked at global sports and what was really appealing about all the teams that have live mascots is the strong connection it creates between the team and the community." Bruce will reside at RuffTrack Farm at Riverstone in Sydney's northwest after the NSWRL struck a partnership with the youth-based support program to have him work as a "therapy dog" with disengaged youths. Origin has come a long way since 1997, when then NSW coach Tommy Raudonikis issued the Blues a secret code - "cattle dog" - that signalled the moment to start an all-in brawl with Queensland, a punch-up enshrined in league history.
---
Medallist could be Origin key That 22-year-old Melbourne Storm fullback and this year's Clive Churchill medallist Ryan Papenhuyzen has been included in the NSWBlues squad to take on the Queensland Maroons in the first State of Origin match to be played at the Adelaide Oval on November 4 could prove to be a masterstroke by Blues coach Brad Fittler (Slight stature but immense impact as Paps hits next level, 26/10).

Papenhuyzen has been a revelation this season, and is undoubtedly one of the contributing factors in the Melbourne Storm having won the 2020 grand final at ANZ Stadium on Sunday night by defeating the minor premiers, the valiant Penrith Panthers.

For the first time in many years I have total confidence in the Blues winning all three Origin matches by comfortably beating the Maroons team coached by Wayne Bennett.

Eric Palm, Gympie, Queensland "" " When I am under pressure and things don't go my way in the workplace, can I have the same rights as Craig Bellamy does in the coaching booth please?

We're talking the right to go "full crazy" here - the type of Ren & Stimpy Show theatrics, you know, neck muscles bulging with eyes popping out of their sockets screaming into the microphone then Kung Fu kicking a chair.

Great viewing for the kiddies don't you think? Leaves you wondering, is there a sin bin for coaches?

Robert Brown, Davistown

Strip search victims deserve full government backing All Australians should be outraged at the abhorrent treatment of 13 of our women in Qatar in the last few days (Women in strip search outrage, 26/10).

The federal government must voice its outrage in the strongest of terms. Our citizens have a right to expect safe and unhindered travel throughout the world.

They certainly have a right to be treated with privacy, respect and dignity. The victims of this deprivation of liberty and decency are entitled to a formal apology, if not financial compensation from the Qatar authorities. The federal government must insist on this happening.

John George, Terrigal

Qatar to pay the price When we can travel overseas again, it might be worth remembering the gross, offensive, embarrassing and invasive treatment that some women were subjected to by over- zealous staff on the tarmac of Doha airport (Women in strip search outrage, 26/10).

This behaviour would not be tolerated here and we wouldn't expect it anywhere else.

Future travels through Qatar might now be off tourists' plans. Marg Swindells, Castle Hill

Not the time for greed How many of the people who have lost their jobs due to the pandemic would love to earn the money these CFMEU types are earning now but, typical, the union heavies want more and more (Building union's 'gouge', 26/10).

They don't care that we are already, as a country, on our knees looking for a way up out of this COVID-19 plight. They are just greedy thugs.

Pat, Narara

It takes more than words Great reflection on the changing of the meaning of specific words, Tim Blair (Leftist war on words - column, 26/10).

Over the last 20 years we have witnessed major changes within our cultural, educational, political, and communications institutions.

Sure, words have been mightier than the sword in the advancement of equal rights, same-sex unions and individual freedoms.

But we are now witnessing daily 'superior moral voices' playing hypocrite in order to change past moral choices.

We must decide on our choices and newer pathways in pursuit of contented relationships, satisfactory employment and a safer united multicultural Australia.

Words are an important part of change - actions, however, require acceptance. R. Brown, Ballina

Horse sense not present Since 1861 the Melbourne Cup has been the race that stops a nation, and packs a racecourse - but not this year (Cup will be empty without a crowd, 26/10).

The only people at the track self- distancing will be horses and jockeys. The Victorian government has rejected the Victoria Racing Club submission to host a small crowd within public health guidelines.

This comes at a time when large crowds in NSW and Queensland watched football grand finals.

For the time being horse sense in Victoria seems to be off the menu. Peter Penglis, Kambah, ACT

Little let-up down south The frustrations of Victorians spending a long weekend of severely restricted movements while drones reportedly kept an eye on private gatherings would have been compounded when Premier Dan Andrews' promised significant announcement turned out a fizzer (Fury over Dandemic reopening setback, 26/10).

Even the mostly friendly media that attend his briefings turned on him. That up to 50 mourners can now attend outdoor funerals must be of little comfort to relatives of the coronavirus victims who lost their lives due to the hotel quarantine bungle.

Brian Whybrow, Wanniassa, ACT

A question of balance Memo to Victorian Premier Daniel Andrews - living with COVID-19 requires dealing with balancing both the health and economic fronts (Fury over Dandemic reopening setback 26/10).

The World Health Organisation's advice to limit using lockdowns to fight the pandemic is straight from the horse's mouth and ready for Dan Andrews' urgent consumption.

Steve Ngeow, Chatswood

Hot end put on hold Drought-breaking rain with more to come, dams full to overflowing, two thirds of the way through spring and maximum temperatures of 16C.

No wonder the alarmists have abandoned the phrase "global warming" as their mantra in prophesying the end of the world as we know it.

Brent Hedges, Manly

Clean up dirty politics One cannot help but concur with Paul Sobb re the accusations against Gladys Berejiklian (Private life is not the key - Letters, 24/10). Unless she can be proven to have assisted Daryl Maguire in his alleged dealings then the subject should be closed.

The Opposition's call for her to step down is thus unfair. It is part of what seems to be endemic in politics at all levels.

If you are in opposition, attacking the morals and character of governing members, in order to (hopefully) persuade the public to vote against them, seems a common and distasteful practice.

Ms Berejiklian has had a failed relationship which may in itself be distressing and she does not deserve ridicule for it.

I might point out that personal relationships in this country are not illegal. Vilification is.

Selma Behm, Gosford

Briefly … These days, so many people act like they are the star of their own reality TV show, gracelessly pushing themselves forward to be noticed. Bonza, Fairfield, Victoria "" " Do the construction union leaders have any brains (Building union's 'gouge', 26/10)? Australia is in a recession due to the COVID pandemic and you want a 15 per cent pay rise. What a hide you have.

Dazza, Singleton "" " Save Victoria - Peter V'landys for Premier!

Cookie, Sawtell "" " The golf course bunker and the NRL bunker are similar - they are both hazards to be avoided.

G. Hutton, Saratoga

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
ORIGIN ON MOVE State of Origin may have played its last mid-year series. If this year's event rates well on TV after the grand final, it will become a regular end-of-season series.

Too often the premiership rounds are ruined over six weeks in June and July while 34 of the NRL's best players are unavailable for their clubs.

It affects the integrity of the comp because the stronger teams lose up to half a dozen players, while other sides remain at full strength. Some teams get to play with their Origin stars, others don't.

WHITE STRIP NOT GOOD AS GOLD: JACK Champion Balmain No. 1 Garry Jack has launched a furious attack on Wests Tigers management, angry the club no longer plays in his beloved Balmain gold colours at Leichhardt Oval. Jack was recently interviewed by Adam Hawse on his excellent new podcast, The Fend. "We only play at Leichhardt Oval three times a year and we wear the Wests' black outfit," Jack said. "That's disrespectful to all Balmain fans. "I feel dudded. It should be a gold jersey at Leichhardt. The gold strip has gone, now it's white and it's rubbish. Someone needs to be held accountable for this. "When these two sides came together for the birth of Wests Tigers we were supposed to have one black strip and one gold strip as part of the deal."

PARTY PAIN Coaches and players continue to make huge sacrifices for the NRL during COVID-19. Canberra Raiders coach Ricky Stuart's son Jack turns 21 this weekend and is having a party. But Stuart can't go, due to biosecurity protocols in place to safeguard the game. They will have to wait and have a beer and dinner at the end of the season.

WAY OF WARRIORS Warriors players and staff have made mighty efforts keep the premiership up and running this year, and now the women's team will do the same to ensure the NRLW competition goes ahead as planned during the finals series. Many of the squad will be leaving family and friends behind in New Zealand so they can represent the Warriors. Australian Jillaroos head coach Brad Donald has been recruited to mentor the team and give them the best possible chance of success.

FRIEND SHIP SAILS ON The Sydney Roosters are about to sign inspirational veteran Jake Friend on a new one-year deal. The 30-year-old hooker has played 259 games and won three premierships for the Roosters since debuting in 2008. His form and leadership has been outstanding all season in a team knocked around with injuries to senior players. Without Sam Verrills for most of the season, Friend has played long minutes but thrived with extra workload.

GO CLINT Clint Newton might have retired from the NRL in 2015 at the Newcastle Knights but he's still playing footy. The 39-year-old RLPA boss has switched codes to play third-grade rugby union on the Central Coast, for Avoca.
---
CHINA'S secretive response to the origins of the COVID-19 pandemic highlighted an "allergy to transparency" which Australia was right to challenge, according to acting US Ambassador -Michael Goldman.

Mr Goldman said the Morrison Government should be "commended" for taking on China. China retaliated with a series of escalating trade strikes. "I think it shows, unfortunately, that while China's made some strides in this regard, there still is an impulse towards secrecy and an allergy to transparency," he said.
---
Job references are usually fairly stiff affairs.

"To Whom It May Concern" they begin, with an equally stiff opening sentence that goes along the lines of, "I have known Ben Ikin for eight years …" before, somewhere early in the narrative, you drop in the obligatory, "Ben would make an ideal chief executive of the Brisbane Broncos".

For the casual observers of Ikin's work on NRL360 over the past eight years, such stiff sentences, dressed in formality, might be a suitable fit if -anybody was to ever, say, write a real job reference for him to become the Broncos' next chief executive where it just so happens the job will soon be available.

But it would be an injustice to tar him with such a simple brush. I have known Ikin for much longer than these past eight years, though not nearly as well, and it takes no great strain to remember back to less-formal times when he wasn't nearly this stiff and was, indeed, more widely regarded as his club's party planner.

Trips away, a pub crawl on the bye weekend, the fun at the soda fountain used to be his domain.

Last week, he sat with former teammates at Tommy Searle's funeral, having not had a beer for 10 years or more, as they reminisced about Tommy and, among other things, Tommy's love for a schooner of Tooheys New and, in recognition of what the man had done for him, Ikin downed a schooner of New.

Searle was the Gold Coast boss who signed Ikin to his first contract back in the 1990s. The Seagulls, as they were known, got him a job picking up glasses at the Coolangatta Hotel, where they would go after games.

Ikin started the 1995 season as an 84kg centre off the bench for reserve grade and, the night he made his first-grade debut, the team had a win and headed back to the Coolly to celebrate.

"What are you doing?" his boss asked.

Was it a trick question? He was celebrating with the boys.

"Not tonight you aren't," his boss said. "You're rostered on." He spent the rest of the night picking up glasses, many of them kindly stacked by his teammates.

What happens next needs no introduction here.

Three games into his first-grade career, he got picked for Queensland, turning up at camp with training gear and his pyjamas.

Chris Close had to take him to the local menswear store to get his disco clothes. He soon got a taste for that and went from being a professional -footballer to a professional -celebrator. Ikin loved camp like few did, or even could.

By the final Origin, his fat legs bulged out from his shorts, by now under such tremendous pressure that it is testimony that they were able to, as the Maroons themselves proved that entire series, stand up under the strain.

He finished the season at 98kg.

He retired early, at 27, after a knee crumpled under him one last time and it would have been understandable if he went the way of many -prematurely retired players and either disappeared altogether or, the favoured route, popped up as an assistant coach somewhere.

But what has happened instead is one of the narratives missing far too often in rugby league.

He got a job working in the commercial department at Gold Coast Titans, left the game to work in construction, came back to the game through a job in the media, later sat on the North Queensland Cowboys board, broadened his knowledge by reading several good books, and now sits on the Queensland Rugby League board.

He has seen the game from the bottom up and has seen enough to know what makes clubs successful and profitable.

This is the way it used to be done in the game, way back before the game got professional and everybody thought they needed to bring in professional people to run it. It reached a state of small crisis some years back when the ARL Commission formed and those charged with making the big decisions fell into this idea that rugby league needed to bring business people in to show everybody how to run the game.

Now, not even 10 years later and after the business professionals spent tens of millions of dollars with nothing much at all to show for it, the best joints are being run the way they should always have been - by people who know the business of rugby league.

It is why the Broncos should be rifling through their mail right now hoping to land on Ikin's application in the pile.

The Broncos used to be the big brand in the NRL.

In recent years, the club has behaved like its place at the top is a birthright, though, and not earned through hard work, and poor decision has followed poor decision to now, where it appears the club has totally lost the formula for what success looks like.

The Broncos are heading towards troubled times. Few in Brisbane have begun to comprehend how tough the road actually looks.

Next week, the club holds its annual general meeting where it is expected to reveal a deep drop in profit, if not a loss, amid hostile questions about the team's lack of success, the terms of coach Anthony -Seibold's contract, and talk of a second team in Brisbane. For years, the Broncos had Brisbane to themselves. A city with two million people, big crowds every home game, all those sponsorships and corporate deals to themselves.

The Broncos had drawing power greater than any club. Kind of like the Roosters now, players really did go there for less, tempted by the strong chance of a premiership.

The COVID-19 pandemic has smashed the Broncos, though. The misconception around town is that the smaller clubs such as Wests Tigers and Manly were in most trouble with COVID but the reality is the big clubs - mostly Brisbane and Melbourne - which budgeted for big crowds and plenty of sponsorship dollars, are most vulnerable.

At the same time, ARL Commission chairman Peter V'landys has indicated the NRL plans to expand with a 17th team in Brisbane within the next broadcast deal, creating more financial stress for the Broncos.

The cross-town rival means the Broncos will no longer have it all their own way and, with a competitor across town, will have to finally grow up.

Their problem now is they don't know what that looks like.

The turnaround begins with success on the field.

Ikin understands not just that, but why and how, and is better placed across both areas than just about anybody you can think of.

The Broncos' roster is out of balance, a roster he called "disgraceful" some weeks back on NRL360.

The Broncos can't win the premiership every year but they should be contesting for it. They are not doing that now and haven't done for some seasons. With all their natural advantages - they still polled second this week among current players asked which club they would like to play for - there is no excuse for the Broncos not to be contesting every season.

Rebuilding years are the excuse of the weak and confused.

Teams turn around with coaches who know how to recruit. Ikin often quotes Jack Gibson, who said the best coaches are the best recruiters.

Ikin knows the business of rugby league, enough to know the urgers and the spruikers from the legitimate, which in this game is an art in itself.

He knows that profitable clubs are successful clubs, and that successful clubs are profitable clubs.

And this is what separates Ikin from others - he knows why. These are the sorts of things that should be said in a proper job reference, if ever I was going to write one.
---
Knights' Origin star victim of repeated head blows

THE football career of Queensland Maroons and Newcastle Knights forward Tim Glasby is over, with the NRL approving his medical retirement on the basis of repeated -concussions.

The hard-working State of Origin forward was notified last week of the NRL's decision to ratify his retirement on medical grounds after two months of assessing his case. Glasby will retire as a tough and influential forward for both the Knights and his previous club, Melbourne Storm, with his career featuring a premiership ring from 2017 and 138 first-grade appearances.

News Sport first revealed the serious concerns for Glasby's playing future and more importantly his health in July after the 31-year-old father of two had suffered ongoing concussion symptoms from repeated head knocks.

Glasby's final game was against North Queensland, where he suffered a HIA and failed to return to the field during the Round 7 clash in June.

It was his second concussion this year while Glasby was stood down for a game last year after suffering two head knocks in three weeks.

As a result of the concussion against the Cowboys, Glasby underwent a series of neurological tests.

He visited the Sports Concussion Clinic at the University of Newcastle, working with leading neurologist Chris Levi.

With the respected forward's welfare their priority, the Knights informed the NRL of their request to formally apply for medical retirement in July.

It's understood Glasby, who played five State of Origin games for the Maroons, is comfortable with the decision to retire and in the knowledge that by putting his health first, he can focus on his post-football career path as a financial planner.

The Rockhampton junior, who made his NRL debut in 2013 with the Storm before going on to win the 2017 premiership with Melbourne, will remain inside the Knights COVID-19 "bubble" for the rest of the season with his big-game experience required to help guide the club into the first finals series in seven years.

Glasby was off-contract at the end of next season and while his premature retirement is unfortunate, his departure will provide salary cap room for the Knights to retain several off-contract stars, or recruit externally.

TIM GLASBY'S KNOCKS August 31, 2018: Round 25: Playing for Storm v Penrith. Ruled out by half-time due to concussion August 12, 2019: Round 21: Knights v Eels. Stood down for one week suffering two knocks in three weeks May 31, 2020: Round 3: Knights v Penrith returns from HIA to play 60-minutes June 27, 2020: Round 7: Knights v Cowboys lasts just 21-mins after failing HIA June 28-July 19, 2020: Unavailable for selection
---
NEW TIGER GETS REAL-LIFE OPPORTUNITY AFTER 'SIMULATING' TEDESCO DAINE Laurie has been asked twice before to fill the boots of James Tedesco - or at least give his best impersonation.

So the livewire from Iluka studied the tapes and watched Roosters games live. Then, when Thursday evening rolled around and Penrith coach Ivan Cleary ran his boys out for their weekly opposed session at Panthers HQ, Laurie did his best to mimic the style, sweeps and everything else rugby league's No.1 fullback has in his bag of tricks.

Officially, Laurie was part of the Cougars - a name last year given to those Penrith NSW Cup players who, with their own competition cancelled during COVID-19, grew increasingly fond of Thursday scrimmages against the NRL boys.

"Because that became our game day," the new Wests Tigers fullback recalled now, five months on.

"Or that's how we viewed it.

"If first grade were playing the Roosters, then it was up to us Cougars - that's what they called us - to learn, then run the Roosters sets against them.

"And before every session, we'd speak as a group about how important it was to rip in and get that right.

"To make sure we did everything we could to help the boys out. "So while it was frustrating for me to watch them out there on the weekends, winning and having so much fun, it was also my job to make sure it kept happening." Which, as you can imagine, had really ramped up for Laurie and his Cougars come October. When, in that week before the NRL finals and with Penrith on an undefeated run stretching 15 games, he again mimicked the Roosters fullback who, days later would be dusted in an upset loss.

So as for again being called in to replace the NSW Origin megastar, this time in the Tigers jersey he quit four years ago?

"I've always liked Tedesco, obviously," Laurie, 21, said. "But it's not who I model my game on … No, that's my uncle Cody Walker.

"But James Tedesco, yeah, he's definitely next level." Which isn't anything Wests Tigers fans need to be told again. Especially given this afternoon at Campbelltown Stadium, and with the little 'c' next to his name, Tedesco once more returns to cause carnage against the club he was supposed to bring greatness.

Indeed, it has now been almost four years to the day since the -Menangle farm boy - back then off contract with Luke Brooks, Aaron Woods and Mitchell Moses - was ordered by coach Ivan Cleary to decide on a contract which, worth about $1m, was sitting on the desk of his agent Isaac Moses.

Tedesco was issued an ultimatum, a decision which has not only been widely panned since, given he walked, but has also moved the club through six players - or eight if you include contract offers to Latrell Mitchell and Josh Addo-Carr - in an increasingly difficult bid to replace him.

Should Cleary have given Tedesco more time? Regardless, when asked in April 2017 if he would have stayed were it not for the deadline, Tedesco told Sydney radio station 91.3FM: "Yeah, possibly. Ivan told me and my management that they wanted an answer by Friday.

"We both said then we weren't ready to make a decision, (but) he was pretty adamant.

"They made it public too, which ... I didn't really think there was a need for that." Worse happened next for the NRL battlers who, suddenly cashed-up, paid big money to land Josh Reynolds, Moses Mbye, Russell Packer and Chris McQueen - none of whom got to the heart of the real problem. Which was: When Tedesco sat down with club officials, and was sold on a vision for the future, he couldn't see it. Just as, two years later, Mitchell wouldn't see it either. What both wanted, more than anything, was to be part of a genuine premiership contender. Which, coincidentally, brings us back to Laurie.

Laurie is indicative of the change now happening inside Tigers HQ. An evolution found, increasingly, in the detail.

Like the fact that the club's four major decision makers - coach Michael Maguire, CEO Justin Pascoe, chairman Lee Hagipantelis, and football manager Adam Hartigan - returned to their same desks this year.

For the first time in some time, the Tigers have stability. They have re-signed Dave Nofoaluma, kept Zane Musgrove from St George Illawarra and snared rising New Zealand backrower Tuki Simpkins, while also keeping enough money to chase that next big name.
---
DATA SECURITY THE security of data in the COVIDSafe app has been questioned by Australian IT companies, which were passed over for a foreign-owned company that was awarded a lucrative government contract to build the contact-tracing app and manage the database.

The contract to host the sensitive data in the cloud was controversially awarded to foreign-owned US giant Amazon Web Services, despite at least three Australian companies hoping to tender for the project: Vault, Macquarie Government and Sliced Tech.

The government yesterday denied claims this week by Labor MP Ed Husic that Amazon planned to store the information in a Chinese-owned data centre it manages, Global Switch in Pyrmont.

Instead, iTWire reported the COVIDSafe data would be held in the Australian National Data Store, which "is a secured and encrypted data store hosted by AWS in Australia".

The decision to award the contract to Amazon was made after the COVIDSafe project was removed from the Health Department's Digital Health Agency and placed under the control of powerful Home Affairs boss Mike Pezzullo.

"Why did they lock out Australian companies from where the data resides in the country?" asked one irate Australian IT company representative who was blindsided by the Amazon contract.

"Why didn't the Australian Digital Health agency, which was set up specifically by the government to manage Australians' health data, run the tender?" he asked. He also queried why decisions about sensitive personal data should be handled by the same department that runs both the Australian Federal Police and intelligence services.

Even without Chinese involvement, data hosting by a foreign-owned company still raised issues of "sovereignty and security", he said.

Also yesterday, US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo praised Australia's call for an independent inquiry into the origins of the coronavirus.

It comes after China's ruling Communist Party angrily dismissed Canberra's calls for an investigation into how COVID-19 spread from the Chinese city of Wuhan.

Mr Pompeo, who has piled pressure on China over the pandemic, waded into the dispute on Wednesday as he sarcastically said that Australia upset Beijing through its "temerity" in asking questions.

"Who in the world wouldn't want an investigation of how this happened to the world?" Mr Pompeo told reporters in Washington.

"The solution to this crisis will come from freedom-loving people around the world.

"I'm very confident that authoritarian regimes are poorly designed to deal with the kind of crisis that this pandemic has engendered," he said.

He said he was "heartened" to see Australia and other countries joining US calls for an independent investigation.Mr Pompeo added: "While we know this started in Wuhan, China, we don't yet know from where it started and in spite of our best efforts to get experts on the ground, they continue to try and hide."
---
THE race for this year's title has turned into a survival of the fittest, but some unfair advantages have exposed why not every team is getting an equal opportunity in 2020.

And as a mounting injury crisis grows, a leading expert has revealed why "major injuries" can be traced back to clubs which are struggling to cope with changes caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.

NRL physio Brien Seeney said that while overall injuries were slightly down this year, the number of injuries sidelining players for five weeks or more had almost doubled - jumping from 3.97 per round in 2018 to 6.64 in 2020.

Thursday's blockbuster between the Sydney Roosters and Melbourne has been robbed of another big name in Storm superstar Cameron Munster (knee), who has joined Cameron Smith (shoulder) on a growing list of outs.

And the Roosters had nine players missing for last Thursday's win over St George -Illawarra.

Manly's Addin Fonua-Blake also injured a knee on the weekend as the Sea Eagles' season went from bad to worse, while Sivila Havili's tricep -injury is another blow to -Canberra.

Injuries have to be factored in every year but this season the 18 uninterrupted rounds on top of all the other changes has just turned it into an ironman event. There are no byes because of the post-season State of Origin, adding to the strain as we count down to the finals.

While no one is questioning the mighty job the NRL has done to get the comp back up and keep it going, it has come at a hefty cost to player health and injury management.

There are also some huge unfair advantages, specifically those relating to travel.

Just look at weekend rivals Penrith and Canberra.

The Raiders have racked up close to 70 hours of travel time this season. Ten of their 13 games have required long-haul trips by road or plane.

Competition frontrunners the Panthers have had just one game outside Sydney all season, against Gold Coast.

The Panthers' other "big" trip was to Lottoland to play Manly, a distance of 76km. They have also had three games at Kogarah, 65km away.

The Raiders basically have a six-hour road trip every time they play in Sydney given they can't stay at a hotel the night before a game or after it. And it all has an effect on prehab and rehab for players.

While Ivan Cleary was complaining about two questionable calls that went against Penrith during Saturday's win, the Canberra players were preparing to board the bus for another long haul back to the nation's capital.

It puts things in perspective.

While everyone understands there was little anyone could do to make it completely fair to all clubs, that doesn't deny that some clubs have been hugely disadvantaged.

Although, there are extenuating circumstances affecting every club to a degree. Newcastle has also had a stack of travel after home games were transferred to Gosford for a period, and the Knights were missing eight regulars in their smashing win over Wests Tigers on Saturday. Manly has been severely bashed up. Powerhouse prop Addin Fonua-Blake (knee) is expected to miss two weeks, while big Marty Taupau is in doubt after a sickening stiff arm from Jack Hetherington.
---
NORTH Queensland captain Michael Morgan is pushing hard for a May 28 return as he continues to recover from the minor shoulder surgery he had during the COVID-19 break.

The club will know more about the 28-year-old's return date next week, but the star playmaker is tracking well before the season resumes.

The skipper joined the rest of the Cowboys in returning to training this week as the North Queensland club prepares for the 18-week "grind".

Under the revamped 2020 NRL format, clubs will play 18 games straight and not the usual 12 to 15 leading into the State of Origin bye rounds.

Cowboys playmaker Scott Drinkwater said there was now more focus on how players treated their recovery sessions.

"It's going to be a grind this season, without having the byes," he said. "It's really important for us to come back in good shape, which all the boys were.

"(Cowboys coach Paul Green) Greeny is really happy with our fitness. Eighteen games straight, it will take a bit of a toll on the body so you have to make sure you're doing all the things right." The 22-year-old livewire made a sizzling start to the 2020 season, kicking off with a player-of-the-tournament display during the NRL Nines.

Drinkwater partnered Morgan in the halves in the first two rounds before the season went into hibernation because of the coronavirus pandemic.

Morgan will be assessed by club physios next week but Drinkwater was confident it would not disrupt their plans.

"I'm not too sure what Morgo's plans are," Drinkwater said. "I'm sure Jake (Clifford) will do a great job if he gets the chance to come in."He played a lot of games last year and is familiar to the halfback role. I'm sure our cohesion will be pretty sweet."
---
VIRUS INQUIRY POWERFUL global leaders including the UK, Russia, India and Japan are among a coalition of 62 nations supporting Australia's call for an independent inquiry into the coronavirus ahead of a vote at the World Health Assembly.

The demand for an "impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation" of the international health response to COVID-19 is expected to be the most controversial motion in a draft resolution written by the European Union, due to be put to the Assembly tomorrow morning AEST.

It tasks World Health Organisation director general Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus with launching the evaluation "at the earliest appropriate moment" to review the "lessons learned" from the deadly pandemic.

Senior Federal government sources said they do not expect China to oppose the inquiry.

One source said while it will not be known for sure until the motion is called tomorrow, it is believed Beijing will have little option but to support the inquiry given the overwhelming global support for it.

Australia was an early supporter of the draft resolution, which, in addition to having the support of the EU's 27 member states, also has the backing of 35 other countries.

The inquiry motion does not mention the origins of the coronavirus, but does call on the "actions of WHO and their timelines pertaining to the COVID-19 pandemic" to be among the issues examined.

It also does not set out a specific method for an inquiry, suggesting using "existing mechanisms" for review as an option.

The review would then make recommendations to "improve global pandemic prevention, preparedness, and response capacity".

Foreign Affairs Minister Marise Payne said there was "positive support" for an independent review into the pandemic to help the world "learn the lessons necessary to protect global health".

"This is about collaborating to equip the international community to better prevent or counter the next pandemic and keep our citizens safe," Ms Payne said. "Australia and a significant number of countries are co-sponsoring the EU-led resolution, which includes a call for an impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation, to be presented at this week's World Health Assembly meeting." The resolution also calls for global co-operation and collaboration to step up at "all levels" to "contain, control and mitigate the COVID-19 pandemic". It specifically highlights a need to provide people with "reliable and comprehensive information" about the coronavirus and measures being taken by authorities in response to the pandemic.

With conspiracy theories and fake miracle cures for COVID-19 increasingly spreading online, the resolution asks countries to counter "malicious cyber activities" peddling this misinformation.

The EU motion recognises the critical role of "extensive immunisation" against COVID-19 as a "global public good for health" once a safe, effective and affordable vaccine is available.

The draft resolution is being proposed by a host of nations, including some of the most powerful, such as Russia and the UK, as well as Australia, Japan and South Korea.

WHO'S ON BOARD Albania, Australia, Bangladesh, Belarus, Bhutan, Botswana, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, El Salvador, Guatemala, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Japan, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Mozambique, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Paraguay, Peru, South Korea, Moldova, Russian Federation, San Marino, Sierra Leone, South Africa.
---
What's the worst thing you've seen on Instagram? Influencers flogging diet products? Photo shoots for pets? For the algorithm masters at the platform, it's nudity - specifically the nipple.

Ten years on from its launch and over one billion users later, Instagram still hasn't freed the nipple for its female users. But it has allowed the anti-vax movement to flourish.

In recent years, anti-vaxxers have slowly begun migrating from Facebook to Instagram (both companies are owned by Mark Zuckerberg, a CEO infamous for his reluctance to take action against spreaders of misinformation on either of his multi-billion dollar platforms). In recent months, their accounts have risen in popularity and follower count at an alarming speed thanks to their enthusiastic sharing of scientifically disproved theories on the origins, spread, and death rates of the coronavirus, which range from blaming 5G towers and Bill Gates for the virus, to suggesting vitamin C, silver and bleach as cures.

As of right now in Australia, the most notable peddler of corona-misinformation is Pete Evans, a chef with 235,000 followers and a penchant for vague captions like "who wants to go down the rabbit hole?" and hashtags like #nevergofullscience.

For the most part, users like Evans have circumvented Instagram's community guidelines by posting open-ended questions like "could this be true?", and using platform-friendly hashtags like #justasking to avoid detection. And until COVID-19, Instagram kept an eye on the movement and removed the occasional user. For the most part the growing community was left alone.

But with a global pandemic came an update to community guidelines across all major social platforms. YouTube, owned by Google, recognised the potential dangers early in the coronavirus outbreak and acted fast, announcing misinformation and con-spiracy theories would be removed. YouTube partnered with popular users to spread scientifically endorsed PSAs on how to keep safe, and provided links to authoritative sources in its home feed, under videos related to -coronavirus, and in searches.

But as seems to be a painful pattern, Facebook and Instagram appear less committed to actually enacting the guidelines. Facebook removed a post from Evans in April after the TGA fined him $25,000 for claims he made about a "biocharger", but last week Evans was back on Instagram talking about the biocharger again. Evans has also been busy misinforming his followers about COVID-19's fatality rate.

On May 21, Evans claimed the fatality rate was 1 per cent, when it was actually 6.5 per cent.

Two days later, he shared a post claiming the fatality rate was actually closer to 0.26 per cent.

Over 360,000 people have died from COVID-19. Those percentage differences, and Evans's blatant lack of regard for accurate information, matters. His willingness to spread lies when people's lives are at risk matters. His potential breach of guidelines matters. Instagram's response matters.

My worst ever Insta-moment? A chef turned TV star with no scientific or medical training saying the "overall death rate is meaningless". Much worse than a nipple.
---
SOME of the NRL's biggest names have been hailed as "heroes" for sacrificing half of their State of Origin payments in a move that kept an NRL-wide COVID-19 forced pay cut to just six per cent.

A competition-wide salary cut of up to 10 per cent was on the cards when the NRL opened negotiations with the NRL players association, but a six per cent pay cut over two years was finally agreed upon on Tuesday.

It means the salary cap for each NRL club will be $9.02 million this year and $9.11 million in 2022.

The figure was made possible after State of Origin players forfeited up to $45,000 each with their match payments slashed from $30,000 a match to $15,000 over the next two years. The State of Origin sacrifice amounts to a saving of $3 million over two years and has spared low income players from taking a bigger pay cut.

"It is very admirable of the representative players to take a hit so the lesser paid players aren't affected," leading player agent Steve Gillis said.

"They are the real heroes in this because the pay cuts may have been greater. A lot of goodwill has gotten this deal done. The players have already done an outstanding job to keep the game going by adhering to all the COVID protocols and restrictions. This is another sacrifice on their behalf to keep the game going." Gillis said his players were happy to do their bit to ensure the future of the NRL.

"The RLPA have done a good job representing players with the NRL," he said. "While it is unfortunate that they have had to take a pay cut we are in very difficult times." The six per cent competition wide pay cut, along with the State of Origin sacrifice, will amount to a saving of $19 million across the next two years. Clubs were originally operating with a salary cap of $10 million.

Gillis said the confirmed salary cap would not affect previous, current or future contract negotiations with players.

"We had a forecast of what it would be and have operated as per normal," Gillis said.

"This negotiation hasn't been a roadblock to deals." NRL CEO Andrew Abdo thanked the players for agreeing to the pay-cuts. "2020 proved when we do things together, we get a better outcome for everyone," Abdo said. "Today is another example of that," Abdo said. "I want to thank the players for the professionalism, discipline and sacrifices they have made - not only to ensure the 2020 season proceeded but so the game can remain -sustainable long term.

"I also want to thank (RLPA President) Clint Newton for the leadership he has shown in securing a deal that provides security for his players, the game and our joint stakeholders.

"The deal is a fair reflection of the value the players bring to our game and the sacrifices they are prepared to make to ensure we remain strong in the years ahead." In line to take a pay cut of up to $300,000 over two years, NSW forward Wade Graham described the pay-cuts as reasonable given the exceptional circumstances.

"We understand the significant impact that the COVID-19 pandemic has had on our game," he said. "To help the game recover we believe it's fair that we share in that and play our part by agreeing reasonable reductions to our payments and benefits>"

EVOLUTION OF THE SALARY CAP 2012: $4.4m 2014: $5.5m 2016: $6.1m 2018: $9.1m 2020: $9.5m 2021: $9.02m 2022: $9.11m
---
NO side epitomises how gruelling the COVID--affected season has been more than the Sydney Roosters.

Coach Trent Robinson had nine first-choice NRL players sitting in the stand at WIN Stadium but the back-to-back premiers still found a way to beat St George Illawarra 24-16 in Wollongong.

With the likes of Victor Radley, Sam Verrills, Brett Morris, Josh Morris, Kyle Flanagan, Boyd Cordner, Angus Crichton, Daniel Tupou and Jared Waerea-Hargreaves all unavailable, Robinson was left with a bench that had only 34 games of NRL experience.

While the Roosters were missing the physical manpower, mentally Robinson was still able to field a team of 17 players who know how to win.

MILESTONE MAN The ever-reliable Mitch Aubusson ran out on to WIN Stadium to join an illustrious group of players who have played 300 NRL games.

So it was only fitting that the one-club veteran bagged a four-pointer. Trent Robinson said that last night's showing was a "club victory" for an ultimate clubman like Aubusson (pictured above).

"That's what you call those nights, it's a club night," Robinson said. "You see the strength of your club. It was a great night to do it on a very special occasion. They don't come around often.

"Mitchell Aubusson doesn't come around often.

"If it was ever the ultimate club night and the ultimate clubman, it was tonight for Aubbo."

BUBBLE BURST The NRL's COVID-19 bubble finally burst on Thursday in spectacular fashion. Dragons forward Paul Vaughan had to sit out the clash after it was revealed he breached the game's strict biosecurity protocols. Vaughan visited an Illawarra cafe for breakfast on game day, a decision Dragons coach Paul McGregor described as "selfish".

The Dragons sorely missed their key man and the go-forward he provides in the middle.

"It's very disappointing," McGregor said. "Once I got told what he'd done and that it was going to the integrity unit … we are well aware of our responsibilities.

"So there is no reason for it -really than it was selfish behaviour. It's not what you need from one of your senior players."

FULLBACK DUEL The Dragons' pre-season started with a duel between Zac Lomax and Matt Dufty, and coach Paul McGregor favoured Lomax in the No.1 jumper to start the year.

But that only lasted one match before Dufty was reinstated at fullback and Lomax shifted into centre. The move has produced 20 tries this season and Lomax's form has thrust him into the State of Origin conversation.

"The strength and surge about him close to the line, his defence is so strong… there are parts of his game when you see Origin moments in him," Phil Gould said.

Much to the delight of the 40 per cent of SuperCoaches who still own Lomax, the rising back scored two tries last night.

Lomax's effort in the kick chase and defence was just as impressive. "That was a try-saver there from Zac Lomax … are you watching Bradley?" Gould asked NSW Blues coach Brad Fittler in commentary.

ROOSTERS 24 DRAGONS 16 ROOSTERS Tries: J Manu 2, M Aubusson, S Tupouniua, L Keary Goals: Taukeiaho 2 DRAGONS Tries: Z Lomax 2, M Dufty Goals: Z Lomax 2
---
If Mathias Cormann leaves politics, a lot will be up for grabs in the Morrison cabinet

The last prime minister to enjoy as long a period of stable leadership as Scott Morrison was John Howard.

Since Morrison took the reins from Malcolm Turnbull in August 2018, his transformation into a revered Liberal leader commanding authority over his party is indisputable.

Serious disunity, while always lurking around the corner, has for two years been latent, not disturbing Morrison's prime ministership.

The unexpected election win gave him crucial gravitas and respect he lacked as treasurer, while his handling of COVID-19 has reinforced his party's confidence in his ability to govern the country soundly.

Australia's success in keeping infections and deaths relatively low is attributable in no small part to Morrison's judgment.

By responding to the coronavirus so decisively, he addressed his leadership weakness over the summer bushfire months.

Significantly, Morrison has also showed his team that, despite his natural tendency for arrogance, he is willing to learn from his mistakes.

He proved his global leadership credentials in his early call for an inquiry into the origins of COVID-19, before successfully lobbying leaders around the world to support it.

Leading calls for an international inquiry would have been a role well-suited to the British Prime Minister, who was indisposed in hospital, or the US president, who has been fighting his own battles.

It was an unprecedented diplomatic success for Australia, elevating Morrison on the international stage.

Morrison has been deliberate in two other ways that has kept his leadership stable.

Firstly, he defends his MPs when they're under siege, such as Angus Taylor and Gladys Liu, showing he's happy to take a bullet for them - as long as it's not fatal.

Secondly, while there are times the government has had to walk on eggshells, Morrison does not muzzle MPs or force them to stick to official Liberal Party policy.

As is fairly evident from my Sky News program, Liberal backbenchers have more freedom to speak on issues than their Labor colleagues. The topics of China and superannuation are two examples.

Now, as restrictions lift and Morrison emerges from crisis mode, senior Liberal sources say early discussions are taking place about whether 2020 is the year for a cabinet reshuffle.

The discussions are not well advanced, but they are certainly happening at a senior level, with the Prime Minister speaking to his closest confidantes about the timing of a potential reshuffle.

The most likely timing discussed for a cabinet refresh is after the Federal Budget in October however there is also a small window after the Eden Monaro by-election.

There are some senior figures urging Morrison to shift Peter Dutton from his beloved Home Affairs portfolio in a potential reshuffle and "promote" him to Defence, replacing Linda Reynolds.

If David Coleman decides not to return to Canberra, Morrison will need to decide on a permanent replacement for the immigration portfolio.

It is understood Mathias Cormann's departure is looking more likely later this year after the budget, which he is involved in as Finance Minister.

Cormann has strongly denied plans to leave politics when speculation has surfaced in the past, but he is not denying it now. He is declining to comment about his future and whether he is leaving this year, including whether he has accepted a role at the OECD.

A Liberal MP said Cormann has been to-ing and fro-ing on his political future for some time now.

"There's been speculation about Mathias going for a fair period of time which hasn't transpired so it's left everybody confused about what his intentions are," he said.

"The logical person to move up into the leadership role when he does go is Simon Birmingham." Turnbull has acknowledged it was a mistake to include Dutton and Cormann in his praetorian guard.

When it came to the crunch, they were not there to truly protect him as PM. It's extraordinary now to reflect on how Turnbull sought Dutton and Cormann's counsel on all manner of policy areas to keep them close.

This infuriated Morrison during federal budget preparations when, as Treasurer, he had his plans overruled by the pair, particularly when Dutton did not hold a treasury portfolio.

This resulted in a front page in The Daily Telegraph with an angry looking Morrison demanding, "Give me Back My Budget." It was a front page that infuriated Morrison even more than the budget powerplay. Now, Morrison is clear-eyed about his rivals. He won't repeat Turnbull's mistakes and has elevated factional allies and trusted confidants into key positions to keep them close.

Stuart Robert is in cabinet as NDIS Minister, Alex Hawke is International Development and the Pacific Minister while Ben Morton is the Assistant Minister to the Prime Minister and Cabinet, giving him a legitimate reason to be in Canberra to advise Morrison.

But this is what conservative Liberals now fear the most: that if Cormann leaves politics, it will be factional heavyweight Hawke who benefits through an elevation to cabinet.

While this would cause factional unrest, those close to the Prime Minister remind him that Dutton and Cormann cannot be trusted, and he needs to keep his supporters close, particularly in the run-up to a federal election that Morrison is determined to win.

It's fascinating to read an article Morrison wrote nearly 20 years ago for the NSW Young Liberal magazine when he was state director.

"There are no longer unlosable and unwinnable elections," he commented. "Government will not return or remain with any Party as a matter of course.

"In short, the political contest is very much alive and always there for the taking." His article concluded with the rousing cry that winning government at a federal and state level was "all up for grabs - let's get on with it." This belief every election can be won clearly underpins his view on politics and explains his ferocious appetite for defeating Bill Shorten in a contest most thought was over.

With Anthony Albanese struggling by the day, Morrison must presume the greatest threat to his prime ministership is from within his team. A reshuffle in which his supporters are elevated goes a long way to securing a lengthy tenure in the top job that we haven't seen since the Howard years.
---
He may be one of the world's most recognisable chefs and food critics, but Matt Preston likes a plain old pizza as much as anyone. In fact, as he tells Stellar, his approach to food as well as to his career and relationships has always been simple: it is all about authenticity. Which is why he is so excited about his latest TV venture - but admits he's a little nervous, too He is not somebody known for doing things by halves, so when Matt Preston rings in his birthday each year, he goes big.

The drinks flow freely, the dinner is expansive and the friends helping him celebrate are in abundance. This year, things were different.

With Victoria in the grips of a second COVID-19 wave and Melbourne back in lockdown, Preston was forced to stay home on the day he turned 59, which he spent taking a call from Stellar and ultimately ordering a humble takeaway pizza. "It's my favourite food," he says, his voice booming with that unmissable British twang. "For my money, pizza is hard to beat." Which is not to say that Preston hasn't spent a fair bit of time at the stove in the past several months. Indeed, the former restaurant critic turned cookbook author, TV host and weekly columnist for this very magazine also stayed busy whipping up and sharing new recipes on his Instagram page, where his 400,000 followers were treated to the "Lockdown Kitchen" video series. There was, of course, the obligatory banana-bread recipe. He has since vowed never to share that dish again on social media, blaming oversaturation - but that bit of fatigue aside, Preston says he has been genuinely surprised by the voracious appetite his fans showed in response to his quarantine project.

"There was the debate at the beginning of the year whether Australia was over food," he explains. "But everything we've seen in the past six months has shown how food is crucial to who we are as Australians." Which is a pretty good place for Preston to be as he embarks on his most consequential new project in more than a decade.

For years, Preston - along with friends and fellow TV hosts Gary Mehigan and George Calombaris - had been the poster child for Network 10's MasterChef, the cooking-competition series that made them household names and that permanently upended the Australian free-to-air TV landscape when it debuted and became a runaway hit in 2009.

The show changed the course of Preston's career and his life, making him and his signature cravats instantly recognisable, not just here but around the world. Not only was the Australian series syndicated globally, but Preston also appeared on versions in Italy, Holland, India, Poland and New Zealand. "I can't believe it," he says. "We were told it was a little show that would probably be a fizzer. When you've been on a show for 11 years, that's how most people identify you. You're not identified by the five or six years you spend at food festivals or your writing. You're identified by TV. We had no idea what we were getting into and it certainly took off in this crazy way." Still, he is loath to give himself too much credit for its success. "Let's be clear," he says. "It took off because the contestants were great. Because you fall in love with [someone like] Julie Goodwin or Poh Ling Yeow." But last year, when he and his cohosts announced they would not return to the show they helped put on the map, it made front-page news. At the time, Preston explained that contrary to rumours, the reason contract negotiations had stalled did not involve disagreements over money - rather, he said, they were unable to agree on terms, and said that MasterChef's lengthy filming schedule did not allow time for other creative pursuits. "We always said that we would stay together or go together," he tells Stellar now. "On the show we always lined up together: Gary, George and myself.

If one of us wasn't there, we would refuse to narrow the gap or stand in someone else's place. Because it didn't feel right." It did not make their decision to walk away any easier. "There were definite dark moments when I sat there and said to myself, 'What have I done? Have I made the right decision? Should I have taken the money and the safe option and stayed?'" Ultimately, he says, "I asked myself a really simple question: 'Is this the worst thing that could happen career wise?' And the answer was no. I loved working on the show. I loved the people I worked with. I am always going to be thankful for the experiences I had doing that show. But the worst thing that could have happened was if I lost the writing gigs. That's who I am. I always defined myself as a food writer." Preston's time in the TV wilderness was not to last long. Soon after former Network 10 boss James Warburton stepped into a new CEO gig at the Seven Network, Preston was one of the first people he called. "James came knocking with the opportunity to make a show that didn't take nine months of my life, giving me the option to spend more time writing or filling in on ABC Radio," Preston tells Stellar.

"I love that. I need new challenges." The challenge Warburton offered was Plate Of Origin, a new-format competition that he will host alongside Mehigan and former My Kitchen Rules judge Manu Feildel. Preston likens the new show to a sort of culinary Olympics, and the format itself nods to international competition, with teams of Australians lining up under the flag of their cultural heritage and cooking their country's signature dish. In fact, the show was meant to make its debut after the 2020 Tokyo Games, to capitalise on the spirit and popularity of the event.

COVID may have thrown a spanner into the works, but few know more than Preston that it reignited viewers' interest in all things food. Last month's finale of the Preston-free new season of MasterChef - with new judges Melissa Leong, Andy Allen and Jock Zonfrillo - drew more than two million viewers, making it one of the most-watched programs of the year thus far. Asked if he considers this an encouraging sign for Plate of Origin, Preston replies, "Whenever you launch anything new there is a certain amount of terror. It's like when you throw a party, you think, 'What if no-one shows up?!' But I'm excited. There is a real hunger and interest in food at the moment and especially now we can't travel, how great is it to be able to lose yourself in food from India, Lebanon or China?" Preston says the dishes on Plate Of Origin are genuinely "things you can make at home. They aren't floating or exploding things. This is everyday food that is spectacular. It doesn't have to be tricky.

In a normal season of MasterChef, it's the stuff you see in those first four weeks." Plate of Origin also gives Preston his first chance to work with Feildel, who tells Stellar that the pair nearly came close to doing so a dozen years ago. "I was not far from perhaps getting a gig on MasterChef. Now we've got the best of both worlds." Feildel says that despite reports to the contrary, there was never anything but a healthy and supportive rivalry between MasterChef and My Kitchen Rules when the two were at their zeniths. "In the restaurant industry there are normally three or four restaurants in the same street," he explains. "We are used to working together. [It's the] networks that work against each other. Behind the doors of the network, all of us have been hanging out together." He mentions a wild week in Greece in 2018, when they travelled there for Calombaris's wedding.

But Calombaris will not be joining this latest TV venture. "George wasn't allowed to play with us at Seven," says Preston. "He was still contracted at Network 10. I'm mindful of the fact it's hard [for him] - before the promos for Plate Of Origin ran, Gary and I got in contact and said we loved him. All these transition points are hard." Preston also sent messages of support and congratulations to the cast and crew involved in this year's MasterChef, although he admits he did not watch it. "You know when you split up with your long-term partner, there is no joy in looking at their Instagram feed?" he says. "Because either they are doing really well and you're not happy - or they are doing really badly and you feel guilty. The worst thing that could have happened is for MasterChef to go belly up because it would have said there is no interest in food television. It's fantastic news for Gary and my career going forward, because it reinforces our belief that food television should be about the food. It would have been awful if the show had become something it wasn't. That would have been hard to stomach." During his conversation with Stellar, Preston constantly directs focus away from himself and back towards the topic of food, a tactic he puts down to his training as a journalist. "My focus as a writer has always been on the person reading," says Preston, who moved to Australia from London in the early '90s to pursue a career covering entertainment before turning his attention to food. "And not to look at me." But, he adds, he considers himself "pretty boring" anyway. Some of his colleagues have made headlines for the wrong reasons - think Pete Evans causing controversy with his anti-vaccination stance or Calombaris's legal troubles, which have ranged from an assault charge to an underpayment scandal in his restaurants. But Preston says it was his first TV appearance, in a cameo on My Restaurant Rules in 2004, that taught him to keep his ego in check. "I could see myself becoming a bit of a d*ckhead," he recalls.

"That's the nature of telly - you start thinking you're important. But I'm surrounded by people who are quite happy to give me a free and frank appraisal of what I'm doing wrong, and it's important to pay attention to that." Chief among them are his wife Emma and their children Jonathan, William and Sadie, who he works hard to keep away from the spotlight. "I do the TV," he reasons.

"They don't." Production on Plate Of Origin overlapped with some of the earliest weeks of lockdown in autumn, but for the most part, recent months have given him the chance to spend more time with his family.

"For a dad, that's a huge privilege to be there and talk to them or do the stuff you wouldn't normally, like play [video game] NBA 2K20 or watch crap movies with my daughter." Feildel believes audiences will see Preston's sillier side on the new show, explaining that it "is a lot more relaxed. We don't wear suits and ties; it's not too serious. We have banter. We have a good time. I was often being told to be serious on My Kitchen Rules. But this show is just letting us be who we are. Which is how these shows should be done, really." Preston agrees: "It's a bit more real, like a backyard barbecue." Only at this barbecue, teams are plating up more than simple steaks and salad, with dishes that span culinary traditions from Venezuela to Cameroon. "I'm incredibly proud that we have this range of teams," says Preston. "They are 10 Australian teams, but each has a different cultural heritage. That's the reason Australia is such an amazing place to eat. And that's the great joy of food - it crosses boundaries.

That's what matters. That is really at the heart of any of these shows." Plate Of Origin is coming soon to the Seven Network.
---
BIGGER CROWD THAN GRAND FINAL DESPITE a disappointing series opener, State of Origin II is on track to host the biggest sporting crowd in Australia since COVID-19 hit our shores with close to 40,000 expected at ANZ Stadium on Wednesday night and seating in corporate suites all but gone. The demand for corporate suites and tickets has been far higher than even the NRL grand final, which drew a crowd of 37,303. ANZ Stadium has become a Blues fortress, with NSW boasting an impressive record of 18 wins, nine losses and one draw since 1999 despite Queensland's series dominance.

BOYD NEEDS 12 MONTHS OFF: DOCTOR LOU Lewis, a doctor, has been involved in Australian boxing for 40 years and says, if Boyd Cordner was in the fight game, he would advise him to stand down for 12 months. "Anyone who suffers three concussions in one season should take a year off," Lewis said. "I've been saying for many years, football players should be under the same rules as boxers. "That's 28 days for the first concussion, no sparring, and if it happens again, he's off for three months and then they're off for a year and need a full neurological assessment. "If in doubt, keep them out." Lewis advised 30 years ago that the footy codes should adopt the same rules as boxing. "I was told there'd be no one left to play," he said. "Obviously, it's changed with the more research that is now available and the NRL approaches it very seriously."

HEAVYWEIGHT HOSTS IT would be the biggest boxing match ever staged in this country … There are plans to bring heavyweight superstars Tyson Fury and Deontay Wilder to Australia in the new year. Matchroom Sports promoter Eddie Hearn has been in talks with venues in Australia to stage Wilder v Fury III. The appeal is Australia is virtually COVID-free while the UK and US can only host events inside a bubble with no fans.

$100M IN CUP BETS THE interest in the US election has blown away State of Origin with NSW punters. The TAB held more than $20 million on Trump v Biden but just $3.5m on last Wednesday night's Origin I in Adelaide. The Melbourne Cup on Tuesday blitzed them both. It held more than $100m.

RUGBY RATINGS DIVE NO wonder there are few tears at Fox Sports about the prospect of losing rugby union to Channel 9. This year's Super Rugby final had an average audience of just 110,000, compared with a monster 500,000 in 2011.

Overall, the average audience for Super Rugby games over the past five years has dropped by 36 per cent. Try getting advertisers on board with figures like that. At the same time, other big sports on the pay-TV network, including NRL and Supercars, have increased substantially.
---
How the defiant and resolute ARLC chairman brought the game back from the brink of a COVID-19 nightmare Ben Fordham calls him The Godfather.

"I'm not suggesting Peter V'landys would leave a horse's head in someone's bed or anything, but he knows how to fix any problem that gets in his way," Fordham says.

However, unlike Marlon Brando's portrayal of Mafia boss Vito Corleone, the ARL Commission chairman and boss of Racing NSW is yet to perfect the skill of sleeping with one eye open.

The stark reality - and personal toll - of how V'landys finds himself just seven days away from the NRL grand final that most considered impossible, is that he has rarely slept at all.

Without pretending to be something other than the former second-rower who played junior footy with Wests Illawarra, V'landys declares he's proud of how he and the NRL took on health authorities, government agencies, state premiers and the Prime Minister to pull off what will long be regarded as rugby league's most difficult season.

Yet in a year of impossible wins, defiant belief and pinpoint goal-setting, he freely offers that his need to use sleeping tablets to survive 2020 has been his greatest failure.

This column remembers ringing V'Landys on a Saturday prior to the competition's return on May 28 after a 10-week lay-off. Clogged up, the 58-year-old answered his phone from under a doona.

"I was very crook at one point through it - which must be said was the flu, not coronavirus," V'landys recalled.

"What stress and strain does, it breaks down your immune system. "For some unknown reason I can handle stress, but it's the lack of sleep that I can't handle.

"And no matter how good you are, when everything is in your mind, it just keeps going round and round in circles.

"That's the greatest thing I've discovered in this journey, is that lack of sleep can cause a lot of ailments. I can see how people fight depression if they don't sleep. Sleep is critical.

"I was proud of myself how I could manage my time, manage the stress, manage the workload, but I could not manage the sleeping.

"That was the only failure. I tried everything, but some nights it was two or three hours of sleep.

"In the end I gave up and took sleeping tablets. I had to because I just couldn't keep going without sleep. I might take it one day every couple of weeks.

"That was the hardest part because when you're in a high-stressful situation talking to state premiers and politicians, trying to get the game up and running, you've got to be at your peak.

"I always say, to be successful you've got to be prepared - and sleep is a big part of that." Sleep will soon come easy for V'landys, who could be excused for entering ANZ Stadium on Sunday for the decider with the exhausted look of an Olympian nearing the finish line of the 50km walk.

His relief will be palpable.

"I never had any doubt, never," V'landys said. "I knew that (NRL chief executive) Andrew Abdo had everything covered.

"Every day I kept a personal chart of the community infections and the number of infections and monitored it each day. "I would email it to Wayne Pearce (ARL Commission), Andrew Abdo, Patrick Delany (Foxtel CEO) and the broadcasters, showing (the infection rate) coming down … That's when I had confidence to set the 28th of May (as rugby league's return date) and gave Project Apollo that challenge.

"I knew what protocols we had to have because of what I had gone through with equine influenza (in 2007) and those biosecurity measures we used.

"Wayne Pearce (on the Project Apollo team) and Andrew did an absolutely brilliant job.

"Ultimately, it came down to trust. I trusted the players and the officials (not to break the bubble rules).

"I would never have gone out there to governments and health authorities and the Prime Minister and premiers, without having trust in what I was saying.

"I knew that everyone was willing to sacrifice for the game. "As I said to the Warriors in a video when they were flying home, the sacrifices they made wasn't only for the game this year, it was for the game for the next 20 years.

"Because if we had to borrow money to keep us going, you'd have to repay that money over a generation … We didn't have to do that and that's because of their sacrifice." In his post-game speech on grand final day, V'Landys will pay tribute to the players, officials, family members and - specifically - the Warriors who have sacrificed so much in 2020.

"Getting safely to the return date of May 28 was one thing, but then it was getting through each round without an infection breakout," V'landys said.

"The wait felt like being in a jail cell. Every week, I'd tick another round off.

"Now we've made it to a grand final and next is a State of Origin series, it's what we set out to achieve.

"All I wanted to do was give back to rugby league for what it did to me, which is mateship and a feeling of belonging. "I was in debt to it. But I think now I've paid that debt back and that's what makes me happy."
---
THE NRL 'RATBAG' FROM ROCKHAMPTON NOW HAS A BUSINESS EMPIRE

IT'S a rags-to-riches tale of a "rat bag" teenager from Rockhampton who has morphed into a business-savvy millionaire at the Melbourne Storm.

Welcome Cameron Munster Inc.

Four years ago, Munster's rugby league career was at the crossroads, the Storm ace kicked out of Australia's World Cup squad by Mal Meninga following an alcohol-fuelled pub spat that sent to Melbourne for crisis talks with Craig Bellamy.

The Storm super coach laid it on the line. In typical Bellamy style, no punches were pulled. He told Munster to wake up and get off the booze … or get out of the Melbourne Storm.

Fast forward to March 2021 and Munster has become a juggernaut - on and off the field. He is the king of Queensland rugby league after winning the Wally Lewis Medal for his matchwinning magic in piloting the Maroons to a boilover of the Blues in last year's Origin series triumph.

Munster's on-field transformation has triggered an off-field revolution that had him branch out into property investment and business ventures, rubbing shoulders with Queensland's most powerful people.

He has a direct line to Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk, who was impressed with him after a chance meeting at a restaurant last year Over the past 12 months, Munster has realised he needs to get serious about planning for life after football.

The COVID-19 crisis last year, which put the NRL premiership on ice for three months, forced every well-paid player to face their mortality in the sport.

Munster, on $900,000 this season, isn't about to go broke anytime soon. But he will if he doesn't use his money wisely.

"I started studying a Certificate IV in Business last year when COVID hit," Munster said. "As an NRL player, you aren't in this game for long. I've had to learn the hard way. As a teenager at the Storm, I thought this is going to last forever. I was always the youngest bloke in the team and suddenly I'm almost the oldest guy (26) in the team.

"I'm getting to my 30s. I've nearly been at Melbourne for 10 years. "In the last year or so, I've watched a few of my teammates at the Storm who have developed their own business ideas and I thought I've reached a stage of my career where I have to start thinking of a life beyond football.

"If I can set a platform for myself now, I can find some stability for myself when I retire from footy." His manager Shaun Pyne added, succinctly: "The ratbag has turned himself into a businessman." The first step for Munster was purchasing his first home in Melbourne, which piqued his interest in other commercial opportunities.

Suddenly, Munster is whipping himself up into a corporate tsunami. He has sponsorship deals with Puma and Musashi and is about to release a product range from shirts and caps to alcoholic ginger beer.

Working with Terella Brewing, he has an ownership stake in a ginger-infused brew coined Mad Dog, a tribute to his nickname at the Storm.

There is an alcohol-free version for kids called Drop Kick, which will be released in school tuck shops across Australia, and he has signed on as an ambassador for a number of charities in the mental-health space.

"I am excited about launching some of these products," he said. "I'm interested in business and investment.

"Making that first investment to get my home made me think about other ventures I could be involved in." Working with Ringers Western, Munster has also devised his own casual clothing range.

"I wouldn't call myself book smart but I believe I network well with people," Munster said. "By nature, I love having a yarn with people and having a joke. "I don't consider myself to be -better than anyone."
---
BEFORE he lifts weights now Nathan Cleary must first clear the garage. Move his car, then shift to one corner that blue Victa lawnmower with grass stuck in thick clumps around each wheel.

Beside his dumbbells, sit five paint tins. Next to that, a small beer fridge. "So it isn't much of a gym," Cleary said, almost apologetically. "But it's enough." With Australian sport now effectively locked down due to the COVID-19 pandemic, The Daily Telegraph today begins its first instalment of a series dubbed: "A Day In -Isolation With …" For while sport around the world may have stopped, -athletes like Cleary haven't. Which is why over coming weeks - and potentially months - we'll take you inside the garage gyms and backyard training fields of NRL stars, UFC fighters, even Olympians.

Makes for some adjusting. Especially for Cleary, the 22-year-old Penrith halfback who usually shifts weights -inside that plush $22 million Panthers Academy with its lifting platforms, oversized kitchen and 12-man plunge pools.

Given it opened in 2016, the same year as his top-grade debut, Cleary has spent his entire NRL career growing at a facility widely regarded as the best in Australian sport.

But now? Um, no.

With Panthers HQ officially shut down from today, Cleary is instead churning through gym lifts like Arnies, Skull Crushers and the 'ol Military Press next to timber piles and Roundup.

"I actually didn't realise how dirty it was in here," he joked when pushed on the state of his new gym.

"So I've used day one to clean everything out." Quizzed on how it felt to suddenly be removed from the routine of NRL life, Cleary conceded: "Oh, it was definitely weird to wake up this morning without anything really to do.

"But it's good to get back to training like when you were a teenager coming through the grades. Humbling, too.

"That, and a good reminder how, no matter what, you have to find a way to get things done." Apart from being kitted out by Panthers staff with a barbell and 150kg in plates, Cleary has also been given an oversized net for passing and goalkicking practice.

"Although I think I'll save the kicking for down at my local park when nobody's around," he said. "I'm too worried about my footies disappearing over the fence." Elsewhere, the playmaker with five NSW Origin caps has managed to convince his two housemates to join him in training sessions for however long the coronavirus shutdown continues.

"And my mate Reece and I, we've actually got a bet on," the Panthers No. 7 explained.

"He reckons he can put on 6kg of muscle in three weeks.

"So, I was happy to take that. He's no chance." Cleary has plenty of reason to stay focused after adding 4kg of muscle over summer.

"But more than maintaining physique I just want to ensure that, whenever this season starts up again, I'm ready," Cleary said.

Which is why on day one of isolation, Cleary was lifting.Or at least right after he moved the car, shifted some paint tins, then pushed that Victa lawnmower into the corner.
---
It's the rugby league quiz that will leave you wondering whether you even know the sport. Blame Aaron Wallace of Fox Sports Lab 1 Who scored the first try in the NRL?

2 With which club did Steve Walters play his last NRL match? 3 Who was the last player named "Bruce" to score a try in the NRL? 4 Who scored the last NRL try at the Sydney Football Stadium? 5 Who was the last player to score six tries in a premiership match? 6 Which two teams played in the last ever semi-finals "play off" match? 7 What was the name of the single released by North Sydney Bear Jason Martin in 1991?

8 Which team won the 1992 World Sevens in Sydney?

9 Who kicked the field goal for NSW in the Super League tri-series final? 10 Which player played in the final seasons for Hunter Mariners, Adelaide Rams and South Sydney (pre readmission)?

11 In what season did Robbie Kearns first play in a first-grade grand final? 12 What are the first names of the three Izzard brothers to play in the NSWRL? 13 Which Great Britain international played nine games for the Crushers in 1995? 14 Which player did Cameron Smith surpass as the leading point scorer in grand finals?

15 Who was the last State of Origin pointscorer at the SFS?

16 Who was the last player to debut as a 17-year-old?

17 Who is the last player to win SOO man-of-the-match awards in consecutive games?

18 Kyle Feldt scored the Cowboys' last try in the 2015 grand final, who scored their first?

19 Who captained Great Britain in their last win over Australia in Australia? 20 When is the last time the Broncos missed the finals in consecutive seasons? 21 Which player played more than 10 games in 2020 without losing one? 22 Who is the only player in the NRL era to score 200 points in their debut season?

23 Who were the first two NRL coaches to make grand finals with three different teams?

24 Who scored the first try after the COVID-19 shutdown?

25 Who was the last player suspended for 10 weeks or more for an on-field incident?

26 Who has received the longest suspension for a single on-field incident in the NRL era (clue, it's not John Hopoate)?

27 Who scored the first try at ANZ Stadium at its opening in 1999? 28 Who is the only Storm coach to have not won a premiership? 29 Which team holds the record for the biggest comeback win in premiership history?

30 Which team holds the record for the biggest win in the NRL era (1998-2020) 31 Which NSW player won all five SOO matches in which he played? 32 Which are the last three Sydney teams to win the minor premiership? 33 What nickname other than "Tigers" were Balmain known as in their formative years?

34 Who was the last team to win the premiership not captained by a forward? 35 Who is the last player to have scored three tries in a single grand final? 36 Who were the last two players sent off in the same match? 37 How many grand finals in the NRL era (1998-2020) have not featured the Storm or Roosters?

38 Which two players scored five tries in a match in 2020?

39 Who is the only player to have scored 20 or more tries in a premiership season four times?

40 Who is the only player in premiership history to have scored 10 or more tries in 10 straight seasons (he made his debut in 2004)?

41 Excluding 2020, which is the only team to have won a premiership in each of the past four decades?

42 What was the halftime score in the 2020 grand final?

43 Which team has the longest losing streak in the NRL era (1998-2020)? 44 Who is the highest scoring player to have never won a grand final? 45 Who is the highest scoring player to have never kicked a goal or field goal? 46 In what season did Manly last finish as minor premiers?

47 Which coach has lost the most premiership games?

48 Who is the last player to make their NRL debut as a 30-year-old? 49 Who is the only player to have scored a hat-trick of tries in a State of Origin match in NSW?

50 Who are the two players to have scored 18 points in an Origin match for Queensland?

THE ANSWERS 1 Darren Burns 2 Newcastle Knights 3 Bruce Mamando in 1998 4 Paul Momirovski 5 Jack Troy (Newtown 1950) 6 Wests 19 beat Canterbury 14 in 1991 7 Take Us To The Top 8 Wigan 9 Noel Goldthorpe 10 Tony Iro 11 He never played in one 12 Brad, Craig, Grant 13 St John Ellis 14 Eric Simms (41) 15 Jason Smith (field goal G3 1998) 16 Jason Taumalolo (17 years and 83 days in 2010) 17 Greg Bird (G3 2007 and G1 2008) 18 Justin O'Neill 19 Jamie Peacock (2006) 20 1988-89 (their first two seasons) 21 Spencer Leniu (won all 12 games with Panthers) 22 Adam Reynolds (208 in 2012) 23 Jack Gibson (St George, Easts, Parramatta) and Warren Ryan (Newtown, Bulldogs, Balmain) 24 Marata Niukore 25 James Graham (biting Billy Slater in the 2012 GF) 26 Danny Williams (18 weeks for punching Mark O'Neill) 27 Terry Hill 28 Mark Murray 29 North Queensland defeated Penrith 36-28 in 1998 after trailing by 26 points 30 Parramatta defeated Cronulla 74-4 in 2003 31 Brett Mullins 32 Panthers (2020), Roosters (2013-15, 2018), Bulldogs (2012) 33 Watersiders 34 Roosters 2013 (Anthony Minichiello) - Matt Scott was Cowboys co-captain in 2015 35 Michael Robertson for Manly in 2008 36 Adam Blair and Glenn Stewart in the "Battle of Brookvale" in 2011 37 6 (1998, 2001, 2005, 2011, 2014-15) 38 Matt Ikuvalu (Roosters) and Alex Johnston (Rabbitohs) 39 Nathan Blacklock (1998-2001) 40 Manu Vatuvei (2006-2015) 41 Manly 42 Storm 22-0 43 Newcastle lost 19 straight games in 2016-17 44 Jarrod Croker (2158 points) 45 Billy Slater (760 points, all from 190 tries) 46 1997 47 Tim Sheens (318) 48 Ryan Hall (31 and 171 days with the Roosters in 2019) 49 Ryan Girdler (Game 3 2000 at ANZ Stadium) 50 Lote Tuqiri (G2 2002) Johnathan Thurston (G3 2015)
---
FOOTWEAR FIRM OWES FRIZELL THOUSANDS THE ARL has emerged as the second-largest creditor of bankrupt football boot and clothing maker XBlades; and NSW Origin star Tyson Frizell is in the top 25.

The manufacturer, whose shareholders include three-time AFL premiership winner Jimmy Bartel, owes about $12 million, The Daily Telegraph can reveal.

The Australian Rugby League Commission, which is the sport's governing body, is due $429,000.

This is understood to be royalty payments for jersey sales.

Blues back-rower Frizell, who has worn XBlades gear for several seasons, is owed $13,500.

His manager, Michael Lowe, said: "They were quite late with most of their payments but they were really good to work with, -relationship-wise." Frizell's former club, St George Illawarra, is the fifth-largest creditor with $192,500 outstanding, according to a recent report by XBlades' administrator.

The NSW Waratahs rugby union operation is due $131,000 and the AFL $87,000. In all, 82 unsecured creditors are owed $2.65 million. The largest is a little known supplier, Jes Trading.

The report also shows that some of XBlades' creditors actually owe the company smaller sums - the Cronulla club owes $191,000, but is due $260,000.

XBlades also has $7.4 million in loans to its directors and shareholders, although it's unclear who is owed what.

XBlades' directors are US-born retail investor Mike Green, now of Melbourne, and well-known ragtrader David Gazal, of Sydney.

Mr Gazal and his wife, Jackie, have an 11"per cent stake in XBlades, while Mr Green has twice that.

Mr Bartel, who was involved in running XBlades for a period, has a shareholding of 7.5 per cent. He reportedly designed the model worn by Frizell.

Former CEO Leighton Richards has a 22 per cent stake while the founding Spyros family owns 25 per cent through several companies. Bill Spyros was a director until July this year.

He and the company's other shareholders, along with its directors and former executives -either declined to comment or did not respond. Neither did the Sharks nor Jes Trading. Administrators Worrells dec-lined to answer questions. It is known to be looking to sell the business, which continues to trade. In September, XBlades pulled out of the final two years of a three-year deal with NSW Rugby "due to the impacts of COVID-19".
---
THE prominent lawyer who represented 34 Essendon players during the 2013 peptide scandal will attempt to prove Parramatta's Michael Jennings' innocence.

Melbourne-based SC, Ben Ihle, was engaged by Jennings just hours after learning of his anti-doping breach yesterday.

Ihle (inset right) has represented athletes in some of Australia's biggest doping cases, including Commonwealth Games and Olympians, but most notably, players involved in the -Essendon drugs scandal that rocked the AFL.

Importantly for Jennings, Ihle also has intimate knowledge of anti-doping legislation having represented ASADA in the case against former St Kilda player Ahmed Saad.

Outside of sport, he -recently assisted in Victoria's COVID-19 hotel quarantine inquiry.

Ihle was chosen by Jennings and his agent Isaac Moses after the former NSW State of Origin star was suspended by the NRL after an A-sample test -returned a positive reading to two banned substances.

The Sunday Telegraph can also reveal Sports Integrity Australia dropped the bombshell on Jennings 12-hours -before he was due to play for Parramatta because they didn't want him scoring tries after he had knowingly tested positive to a banned substance.

Australia's sporting watchdog has been subject to widespread criticism from NRL fans as to why they chose the morning of last night's elimination final between the Eels and Rabbitohs to rock the -entire code.

Sharks CEO Dino Mezzatesta also entered the furore by questioning why it took SIA 18-days between Jennings' test and his A-sample being declared positive compared to the six months between the test and public notice of Cronulla's Bronson Xerri's doping -violation.

"There are questions that deserve to be answered about the timeline of what the case related to our club took and now this," Mezzatesta said.

"I appreciate they have a job to do, but I can understand why the public are in the dark when they see the large disparity in timing over the cases." SIA rarely, if at all, speak publicly on individual cases, but The Sunday Telegraph has learned SIA confronted Jennings a day after receiving his positive result.

An NRL statement confirmed the timeline of when Jennings was tested. "Mr Jennings was tested by Sport Integrity Australia (SIA) on 21 September 2020 with the positive result received by SIA on (Friday) 9 October 2020," the statement read.
---
MANU Feildel has told people to "do your own research" when it comes to his former presenting partner Pete Evans's wild claims that coronavirus is a hoax.

The French-born celebrity chef, who has long been a lone defender of Evan's paleo posturising, said he had reached out to his My Kitchen Rules mate, worried at times by his erratic social media posts and -bizarre conspiracy theories.

"As a friend, sometimes I do worry," Feildel said, "but I will pick up the phone and have a chat with him. He seems to be on top of his life, seems to be very happy and he's not worried (by the criticism)." Feildel said Evans had "his own lifestyle and his own thoughts but if he wasn't known by the public, -nobody would care. He's got his lifestyle and ways and I'm not here to criticise them." When it comes to the more dangerous health messages Evans has told his followers in recent months, including selling a $15,000 "Biocharger" that wrongly claimed to cure COVID-19, Feildel said: "It's up to you to do your own research. The same with paleo … you either follow the guy and believe it, or you don't, so don't follow him. It's as simple as that." Feildel was paired with former MasterChef judges Matt Preston and Gary Mehigan for Channel 7's new food series, Plate Of Origin, which premieres tonight.

He was also signed to star in -another season of Australia's Got Talent, now postponed because of COVID restrictions.

Preston also told today's BINGE Guide he "lost" a deal to appear on UK television, when coronavirus cruelled those plans.

"Lots of friends went from having full diaries for the next six months to having nothing, so I'm grateful for what I've got," he said. BInge: inside today
---
Another flag, another Norm Smith Medal, and top honours in our 2020 Australian list for Dusty 1 DUSTIN MARTIN Richmond, AFL Turned the 2020 AFL Grand Final on its head as he inspired Richmond to its third premiership in four years with an extraordinary second-half performance. The 29-year-old kicked four goals and became the first player in history to win three Norm Smith Medals. Peerless among our nation's footballers for delivering when it matters most.

2 CAMERON SMITH Melbourne Storm, NRL The will-he-or-won't-he retirement speculation didn't affect the Melbourne Storm captain, who led his team brilliantly to its third premiership in eight years. The 37-year-old continued to defy the critics and even scored a try - the 48th of his career in his 430th game - for good measure in the decider.

3 MEG LANNING Cricket The captain of our T20 World Cup-winning team, a side that was recognised with The Don Award earlier this month as the Australian sports performer whose deeds most inspired our nation in 2020. Lanning also led Australia to a world-record 21st consecutive ODI victory this year with a clean sweep of the three-match series against New Zealand in October. An outstanding leader.

4 RICHIE PORTE Cycling Became only the second Australian to stand on the podium at the Tour de France. The Tasmanian has had his share of heartache in the event, crashing out in 2017 and 2018. But the 35-year-old had his career-defining moment this year when he finished third in the general classification.

5 CAMERON SMITH Golf Augusta is the measuring stick in world golf. If you can light it up at the US Masters, then you're a serious player, and that's exactly what the 27-year-old from Brisbane did. Smith became the first player in the tournament's history to shoot four consecutive rounds in the 60s on his way to finishing tied for second behind Dustin Johnson.

6 SAM KERR Football One of the most potent strikers in woman's football. The Australian superstar moved from the American NWSL to English giant Chelsea on a reported $500,000-a-season contract this year. It has been a successful move, with the Blues claiming the FA Women's Super League title, the Women's League Cup and the Women's Community Shield.

7 DYLAN ALCOTT Tennis The Melburnian collected his sixth straight Australian Open title in January and, while sidelined by the COVID-19 shutdown, wasn't going to let anything stop him getting back on the court. He jetted to France in October under strict health measures and brought the French Open trophy home for a second time.

8 STEWART McSWEYN Athletics Announced himself in 2020 as Australia's most exciting middle-distance runner since Craig Mottram. Broke three national records - in the 1500m, 3000m and 10,000m - and dominated a world-class field in Doha to show he is in the medal frame for the Tokyo Olympics.

9 LIZ CAMBAGE Basketball A massive presence on and off the hardwood, Cambage's ability to dominate all levels of the sport is largely unparalleled. The Opals and WNBA superstar added a WNBL title with the Southside Flyers. The 29-year-old is a proven source for points, rebounds and intimidation.

10 DANIEL RICCIARDO Motor racing The 31-year-old West Australian is the biggest name in Australian motorsport. The Renault Formula One driver is still regarded as a future world champion and is a global name. He finished fifth in the drivers' world championship points standings in 2020, his highest placing since 2017. Ricciardo will join McLaren next year - his fifth team in 10 seasons - after signing a multi-year deal.

11 ALYSSA HEALY Cricket Named female ODI player of the year in February, Healy followed up by helping Australia claim the ICC's T20 World Cup title in March. The 30-year-old put her side on the path to victory with a brutal 75 off just 39 balls in the final against India at the MCG, an innings that saw her named player of the match. A serious force.

12 CAMERON MUNSTER Melbourne Storm, NRL Two premierships, two Origin shields, a World Cup and World Club Challenge silverware on the mantelpiece before his 27th birthday is something to behold. The Melbourne Storm superstar is the fresh face of the NRL heavyweights and not without a chance of captaining the Storm in years to come. Something good usually happens when Munster - a more natural footballer than most - is involved.

13 STEVE SMITH Cricket The cricket superstar notched back-to-back tons - 104 off 64 balls and 105 off 66 - in Australia's one-day series win over India in November. Those knocks took his tally of limited-overs centuries this year to three, the most among the Australians. He was also nominated for the Sir Garfield Sobers Award for ICC Male Cricketer of the Decade, and also for Test cricketer of the decade. The jury is out on whether he will captain Australia again after the ball-tampering scandal, but he remains hugely influential.

14 TYLER WRIGHT Surfing Wright ends 2020 as the No.1-ranked female surfer in the world. Just this month she claimed her second Maui Pro crown to cap off a stellar COVID-affected year. The NSW surfer is on the verge of her third world title. The 26-year-old is our best surfer since Mick Fanning and Steph Gilmore, and plenty more success beckons.

15 LACHIE NEALE Brisbane Lions, AFL The Brisbane Lions star won the Brownlow Medal in 2020. Daylight was second. Before the count, Neale was the unbackable favourite with TAB, and with good reason. Neale won by 10 votes after one of the most dominant individual seasons in recent memory. The prolific ball-winner became an inspirational midfielder, kicking several huge goals in big games. Set an enormous standard this year.

16 JYE McNEIL Horse racing McNeil rode into the history books atop Twilight Payment when the pair combined to capture this year's Melbourne Cup. McNeil stole an early lead in an unforgettable and bold tactical ride that rewarded him with the biggest prize in Australian racing. The previous all-the-way winner was Might And Power in 1997. McNeil is only 25. We're sure to hear a lot more of him.

17 ADAM ZAMPA Cricket Zampa was Australia's leading white-ball bowler in a year in which we played just two Test matches. The leg-spinner is a permanent fixture in our ODI and T20 international teams, after taking 38 wickets at 23.6 from 22 games in 2020. With a T20 World Cup scheduled for 2021, the 28-year-old looms as one of our most important short-form players.

18 ASH BARTY Tennis A strong start to 2020 with a semi-final home slam berth was sunk - like most things - by COVID, but there's no arguing with the numbers. Barty was the top women's tennis player in the world from wire to wire this year, and she even presented the premiership cup to her favourite AFL team, Richmond. Worthy of a beer or two, we reckon.

19 BEN SIMMONS Basketball One of Australia's highest-paid sportsmen since being selected as the No.1 NBA draft pick in 2016 by the Philadelphia 76ers, and continued to hold a strong presence on the global sporting stage in 2020. The two-time NBA All-Star was crowned Rookie of the Year in 2018. Simmons is averaging 16.4 points, 8.3 rebounds and eight assists across three NBA seasons.

20 JAMES TEDESCO Sydney Roosters, NRL It takes a team and luck to win a premiership (in any sport), but the breathtaking brilliance of Tedesco was a big reason why the Chooks went back to back in the 2018-19 NRL seasons. The explosive, hard-running fullback has been the benchmark for No.1s since the retirement of Billy Slater. Tedesco scored 11 tries in 19 games for the Roosters in 2020 and led the NRL in tackle breaks, line-break assists, and run metres. The speedster ranked second in runs overall and kick return metres.
---
THE Broncos have baulked at a proposal to relocate to Sydney and are investigating a self-isolation camp in the NSW Northern Rivers should the club be forced to abandon Queensland.

The Daily Telegraph can reveal the Broncos and coach Anthony Seibold (pictured) have a contingency plan to hold an Origin-style camp in far-north NSW if the Queensland government refuses to relax border controls in time for the NRL's planned relaunch on May 28.

The development comes as ARL Commission chairman Peter V'landys vowed to do everything possible to avoid pulling Broncos, Cowboys and Titans players out of the Sunshine State.

The NRL is leaving no stone unturned to resume the premiership next month and that extends to the three Queensland teams - the Broncos, Cowboys and Titans - shifting to Sydney if the league cannot overcome border restrictions related to the COVID-19 saga.

The Titans have indicated they are prepared to relocate 842km to Sydney, but the Broncos are exploring other options to remain as close to the Queensland border as possible. Queensland's glamour club is considering setting up base in the NSW Northern Rivers if they are required to recommence training as planned on Monday, May 4.

Proposed location sites include Tweed Heads or Kingscliff, which has previously hosted the NSW Origin team, and more recently the Warriors when the coronavirus pandemic forced their relocation for last month's clash against Canberra.The Broncos hope a self-isolation training camp just south of the Tweed would allow a less disruptive return to Red Hill if the Queensland government eventually relaxes border rules for NRL travel in late May. The Broncos' preference is to get the government green light to remain on Queensland soil.
---
MEET the Wolf Warriors: Aggressive, blustering, and given to the occasional tantrum, they are the front-line soldiers in China's ever--louder propaganda war.

These are the diplomats, spokesmen and advocates tasked by Beijing with shifting blame for the regime's failure to stop COVID-19 from escaping into the world - and at the same time -convincing us, against mounting evidence to the contrary, that the Chinese Communist Party's intentions are peaceful.

Taking their name from a popular nationalist Chinese film franchise about a Rambo-like security contractor who takes on American mercenaries, the Wolf Warriors compete to outdo one -another with aggressive, bullying rhetoric - as well as a thin-skinned hypersensitivity that makes them the ultimate cry-bullies.

In other words, when it comes to the subtle art of using words to win friends and influence people, these "diplomats" are more -Eric Cartman than Henry -Kissinger.

But now with trade tensions at an all time high over demands for a coronavirus -inquiry, Beijing's wolf warriors in Australia are at the forefront of the communist regime's crumbling attempts to use "soft diplomacy" to convince the world that its -intentions are peaceful - even as their actions become ever more threatening.

And they've been firing up for some time, with diplomats even turning into Twitter trolls - ironic given that the social media platform is banned in China.

Take the case of Zhao -Lijian, who started out as a minor diplomat and won a coveted spot as spokesman for Beijing's foreign ministry.

Zhao first came to prominence in the United States last year when he responded on the mass internment and worse of China's Muslim Uig-hur population with a series of snarky tweets about racial discrimination in the US.

With coronavirus raging, Zhao made headlines again for pushing a conspiracy -theory that COVID-19 came from the US and was spread by American soldiers in Wuhan for an athletics competition last year, tweeting: "When did patient zero begin in US? How many people are infected? What are the names of the hospitals? It might be US Army who brought the epidemic to Wuhan. Be -transparent! Make public your data! US owe us an -explanation!" Needless to say, there's -little chance that Zhao was pressing that theory without approval from on high, suggesting that for China's foreign service the competition is on to see who can be the most outrageous and offensive in defence of the homeland.

And when it comes to consistency, never mind that Zhao's call suggests China is happy with anybody being -investigated over the coronavirus … except China.

Nor is it just big targets like the US who are the subject of the wolf pack's ire.

China's embassy in Sri Lanka was reportedly so bothered by a tweet by a local with just 30 followers calling the Chinese government "low class" that it fired back "Total death in #China #pandemic is 3344 till today, much -smaller than your western 'high class' governments".

In Australia, the bickering has consequences, with our exports of barley, beef, wine and other products being held up by China's war of words.

The big problem for Beijing now is that having annoyed so many other nations with their behaviour, they may soon find themselves on the end of boycotts of their own.

THE CHINA CHEERLEADERS These Australians have acted in support of China but are not necessarily wolf warriors or directly CCP-affiliated ANDREW "TWIGGY" FORREST: The billionaire mining magnate, whose Fortescue Metals Group is a major supplier of iron ore to China, has been quick to give Beijing the benefit of the doubt. Having organised for China's Victorian Consul- General to ambush a media opportunity with Health Minister Greg Hunt, Forrest has said: "I don't know if this virus started in China or somewhere else and frankly I don't care." KERRY STOKES: The Western Australian media mogul has also been keen for Australia to ratchet down its criticism of China, recently advising Scott Morrison to not "poke our biggest provider of income in the eye" with a coronavirus inquiry. Perth locals have noted the pro-China tilt in his flagship paper The West Australian, which last year ran two editorials in as many months from Beijing's local Consul-General, Dong Zhihua.

KEVIN RUDD: The former PM, apparently having gotten over being "ratf...ed" by Chinese counterparts at the 2009 climate talks, has been a big critic of Mr Morrison's efforts to build support for a coronavirus inquiry, having said earlier this month: "Australian exports find themselves unnecessarily exposed at this time through the Morrison Government not having properly diplomatically prepared this." TIM PALLAS: The Treasurer of Victoria, the only state to sign up to China's contentious Belt and Road Initiative, this week complained that China's tariffs on Australian barley were due to the way "the federal government have conducted themselves".

SHAOQUETT MOSELMANE: The state Labor MP was forced out of his role as assistant president of the NSW Legislative Council for his repeated praise of the Chinese communist regime.

MARK BUTTIGIEG: Another state Labor MP, Buttigieg tweeted earlier this month that "China is our future" and that "Australia can ill afford to maintain its historical and biased preference for China".

THE WOLF WARRIORS VICTORIAN CONSUL-GENERAL LONG ZHOU: Zhou shot to prominence when he gatecrashed a press conference by federal Health Minister Greg Hunt last month. Zhou reportedly helped to develop China's cyberspace "co-operation policy" - even as the Chinese Communist Party was engaged in hacking Western businesses and government departments.

ACADEMIC CHEN HONG: The director of the Australian Studies Centre at Shanghai's East China Normal University, Chen Hong is a leading voice trotted out by Beijing to give China's perspective, often with quotes that are as flowery as they are threatening. "Canberra is exercising despicable opportunism and is deluded in thinking it will result in geopolitical gains," Chen said recently, accusing Australian media of "spreading preposterous lies" and "sensational tales".

GLOBAL TIMES EDITOR HU XIJIN: Based in China, the boss of one of the communist regime's key mouthpieces recently threatened Australia, posting on Chinese social media platform Weibo that we are "like chewing gum stuck on the sole of China's shoes … sometimes you have to find a stone to rub it off".

CHINESE AMBASSADOR CHENG JINGYE: The leader of the Australian wolf pack, Jingye made headlines around the world when he broke longstanding diplomatic rules by leaking details of a conversation with the head of our Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. Jingye has also headed efforts to threaten Australian farmers, winemakers and universities, telling a local newspaper last month that an inquiry into coronavirus's origins would be "dangerous", adding: "It is up to the people to decide. Maybe the ordinary people will say, 'Why should we drink Australian wine? Eat Australian beef?' "

SYDNEY CONSUL-GENERAL GU XIAOJE: The local wolf warrior's "man of letters", Xiaoje is s best known for penning long responses to this newspaper and others claiming that a free press reporting on the origins of the coronavirus violates something called "the moral bottom line". In February he reportedly pushed state ministers and even university vice-chancellors to complain to Canberra about the effects of a ban on flights from China on our "international reputation". The ban has been credited with making our rate of infection one of the world's lowest.

CHINESE AMBASSADOR CHENG JINGYE: The leader of the Australian wolf pack, Jingye made headlines around the world when he broke longstanding diplomatic rules by leaking details of a conversation with the head of our Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. Jingye has also headed efforts to threaten Australian farmers, winemakers and universities, telling a local newspaper last month that an inquiry into coronavirus's origins would be "dangerous", adding: "It is up to the people to decide. Maybe the ordinary people will say, 'Why should we drink Australian wine? Eat Australian beef?' "
---
THEY are the 81 unsung heroes who have made the untold sacrifice to keep the NRL season alive.

On JobKeeper-level wages, stuck in the bubble and without the chance to get a second job or play in a second-tier competition, it's hard to find many in rugby league who have done it as tough in 2020 as the NRL's development players.

The entire competition took a 48 per cent pay cut for the last five months due to the COVID-19 -pandemic. But that's very different for somebody on an NRL development wage compared to a Test and Origin star.

While young guns like Cody Ramsey, Jai Field and Hamiso Tabuai-Fidow have cashed in on their chance, dozens of rookies are still fighting for their futures amid uncertainty around next season's salary cap and roster sizes.

The NRL and RLPA are currently locked in negotiations regarding squad sizes for 2021, but both sides are committed to stopping fringe players slipping through the cracks.

"Squad sizes were always a critical part of these ongoing negotiations as it was important there was certainty provided for players and clubs," said RLPA CEO Clint Newton.

"We now have alignment across the industry in this particular area, with everyone working towards squads of 30 and between two and four development contracts.

"The game has been able to preserve as many contracts as possible in challenging circumstances, which is an outstanding result for our members over the next two years." Former Broncos winger Denan Kemp knows exactly what it's like to have his career caught on the ragged edge. Even when the 33-year old was a consistent first grader for Brisbane he occasionally had to pull beers on the side to make ends meet.

So when news of the pay cut came through, Kemp knew exactly who would be hit hardest.

"My immediate worry wasn't for someone like Cameron Smith or Daly Cherry-Evans it was for the boys on the edge," Kemp said.

"They're basically living two lives, they're trying to progress in their normal life and make ends meet but they can't fully commit to that because they're trying to make their rugby league dreams come alive.

"They can't even go out and get another job. It's kind of the untold sacrifice." To help out, Kemp has partnered with the RLPA to donate two weeks worth of profits from his Bloke in a Bar social media empire to the -players who are most vulnerable.

"My whole career I was basically a second-tier player pay-wise even though I was an NRL player," said Kemp. "Even when I was in the NRL at some stages I had a second job, I was pouring beers to make ends meet. I thought I was lucky enough to have what I have, and that's all due to the footy community and the players, so why not use that platform to give back?" Injuries have forced several clubs to draw deep on their development lists with players like Tabuai-Fidow, Field and Ramsey all seeing plenty of NRL action. Others, like Cronulla's Siosifa Talakai, have parlayed those appearances into upgraded contracts. But even the players who never make the grade are an invaluable part of a teams wider squad and help young players, or late bloomers, make the transition to the top grade.

"Training sessions can't happen without the reserve graders," Kemp said. "We'd come in, do all the training with them, and when the A team does their run through you have to be there for that. But then you'd drive out to your Queensland Cup side and train with them as well.

"You almost work more as a fringe first grader than if you're a first grader. It's all part of the grind, and plenty of people have got it worse, but it can be a precarious situation."

SALUTE TO FRINGE PLAYERS CODY RAMSEY Contract status: Off contract at end of 2021 His emergence has been a rare bright spot in a horrendous year for St George Illawarra but the 20- year-old was nearly lost to the game. After juggling work as a mechanical plumber and commuting to Wollongong for training, Ramsey gave himself a last shot at landing a contract. "I don't think I would have kept playing if I wasn't on the rookie deal cause I did make it hard on myself," he said. He earned a development deal but a shoulder injury almost ended his season. He finally made his NRL debut three weeks ago.

HAMISO TABUAI-FIDOW Contract status: Off contract at end of 2022 Shot to prominence after a star showing in the Nines.

"We probably thought he lacked the physical maturity to play NRL this year, especially considering he hadn't had a grounding in the Intrust Super Cup," Cowboys interim coach Josh Hannay said.

Instead, after debuting in Round 5 against the Warriors, he played 14 matches and scored six tries.

SIOSIFA TALAKAI Contract status:Re-signed until the end of 2021 Two years after flipping bins to make ends meet, the Sharks back-rower now has his sights set on playing Test football.

"I am a bit proud, but still ambitious. I'm always hungry, never satisfied. There's still a fair few things I want to get done before I say I'm really proud," said Talakai.

JAI FIELD Contract status: Off contract at the end of 2020 Field was always supposed to wear blue and gold this year - but for Leeds. "I had a deal agreed, we were waiting for Rhyse Martin to go over to a Papua New Guinea passport to open up a roster spot," he said. "It started to look like it wasn't going to happen, so I ended up at Parra on a train and trial. I went OK in the trials."

JORDAN RIKI Contract status: Off contract at the end of 2021 this raw-boned Kiwi could just be the man to replace the departing David Fifita. Capable of playing on the edge or in the middle, the 20-year old is an exciting prospect with excellent footwork, power and mobility.

"He's definitely got a lot of talent," said Broncos skipper Alex Glenn. "He's got a lot of potential."
---
DESPITE the long shadow COVID-19 cast this year, not everything in 2020 was doom and gloom. In fact there have been many significant medical advances, good news stories and miraculous rescues which offered welcome patches of light amid a dark pandemic.

In July, the quick-thinking actions of three police officers at Casula made all the difference to two toddler cousins found unconscious in a backyard pool. Members of the Al-Achrafe family desperately tried to revive little Destiny and Osman, both aged two, but the children weren't breathing and there was no pulse.

But police officers, Sergeant Mick McClafferty, Senior Constable Peter Heginbotham and Senior Constable Victor Suarez, arrived in time and began performing CPR and kept the pair alive until the paramedics came and took them to hospital. Even then, the tots had to be put in a coma and it took a week until they received the all-clear.

In June, Australians rejoiced when missing autistic teen William Callaghan, 14, was found safe and well after three days in freezing temperatures in Victorian bush known as Mount Disappointment - later to be dubbed Mount Miracle.

Another child lucky to be alive is three-year-old Ayda Gezgin, found in the wreckage of her apartment 90 hours after an earthquake struck Turkey. And another three-year-old, Elif Perincek, was also miraculously rescued after three days.

While 2020 has been a horrific year for shark attacks - the eight deaths to date are the most in nearly a century - some have been lucky to escape with their lives. In early Dec-ember, surfer Dion Lynch was bitten by a great white in South Australia and had to swim back to shore despite "catastrophic" lacerations to his back and walk another 300m to get help.

"The stars aligned for this gentleman," paramedic Michael Rushby said. It wasn't such a lucky escape for a trio of baboons who broke out of a truck on the way to Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, where a male in the group was scheduled for a vasectomy.

The 15-year-old male and his two female companions casually strolled around the Sydney hospital, seemingly oblivious to puzzled bystanders and medical workers, before they were eventually wrangled by police officers and animal experts.

"I'm at RPA ... there were three baboons in the carpark," one witness told 2GB. "They even had shiny red bottoms." In more scientific news, researchers at James Cook University made a- -breakthrough which could lead to an early diagnostic test for Alzheimer's, with the same techniques used to study the -origins of the moon. They used mass spectrometry, normally used to analyse meteorites and lunar rocks, to compare brains of those with the disease and healthy brains.

Another positive story this year was the -release of Australian academic Kylie Moore-Gilbert from an Iranian jail after being locked up for two years.

And last week it was the "Christmas Miracle" wombat - found alive in its dead mother's pouch. The wombat, Holly, now lives at the Australian Reptile Park after being rescued when her mum was killed by a car.

The miracle kids Izmir quake survivor Elif Perincek after being pulled from the rubble in the quake in Turkey and (right) in hospital.

Lifesaving CPR Destiny Shrief with Senior Constable Peter Heginbotham, who gave her CPR after she was pulled from a pool.

Teen found Missing teenager William Callaghan was found alive in rugged Victorian bushland.

Shark survivor Dion Lynch was bitten off Kangaroo Island.

Baboons escape The baboons at RPA Hospital. Picture: Seven

Wombat saved Holly was saved from her dead mum's pouch.

Aussie freed in Iran Kylie Moore-Gilbert as a free woman.
---
JUST WHAT DOES THE FUTURE HOLD FOR SPORT IN 2021? BUZZ ROTHFIELD PEERS INTO THE CRYSTAL BALL FOR HIS PREDICTIONS

STORM TROOPERS No Cameron Smith, no worries.

Not when you've got the best hooker in the world to replace him, the 22-year-old Harry Grant.

Of all things Storm will miss is Smith's leadership. Yet they've got the NRL's best player, Origin hero and five-eighth Cameron Munster, to steer this side around the park.

The best indication of their extraordinary strength of the park is our recent top 50 player list.

They had four in the top 12 - Cameron Munster, Ryan Papenhuyzen, Grant and Josh Addo-Carr. Plus another six - Jesse Bromwich, Jahrome Hughes, Brandon Smith, Nelson Asofa-Solomona, Chris Welch and Felise Kaufusi.

Dale Finucane and Justin Olam wouldn't have been out of place in the list either. The one query is their preparation and being ready for the opening round. Coach Craig Bellamy has given the entire squad until January 4 to return to training.

THE QUINELLA We're tipping South Sydney Rabbitohs to replace Penrith Panthers in the grand final.

You add Jai Arrow to the middle and play Cameron Murray on an edge where he is best suited. Plus they'll have Latrell Mitchell settled in at fullback and hopefully injury free.

They will want to send out the old supercoach Wayne Bennett a winner.

ORIGIN DOUBLE The 'worst Queensland team in 40 years' are a huge hope of winning back-to-back State of Origin crowns. When you add David Fifita and Kalyn Ponga to the Maroons outfit that defeated the Blues, they are going to be awfully hard to beat.

BIGGEST IMPROVER There is no question the Gold Coast Titans will be in the top eight. Any side that adds David Fifita and Tino Fa'asuamaleaui to one that won five straight at the end of the season could even be a top-four hope. Their coach Justin Holbrook, a great operator, has added highly regarded strength and conditioning coach Klint Hoare as high-performance manager.

THE SPOON We know the Broncos are going to improve under Kevin Walters and hand over the most unwanted 'prize' in the game to another club.

We're thinking the Cowboys. This is no reflection on new coach Todd Payten, who did such a wonderful job as a caretaker with New Zealand's Warriors. It's just the Cowboys showed little this year to finish 14th with just five wins under a good coach in Paul Green. They are paying $2 million from their cap on Michael Morgan and Valentine Holmes, both of whom offered little last season.

It could be a battle between the Cowboys and the Wests Tigers at the bottom. Michael Maguire won't be in a position to lift his side until big-money players Russell Packer and Moses Mbye are off contract to free up salary cap space.

HAPLESS HOOKER Damien Cook's brief Test career is under threat and through no fault of his own. Harry Grant looks like the Test hooker for the next decade. He's a phenomenal talent and a really decent young man.

AGE SHALL NOT WEARY HIM Wayne Bennett gets towards the end of next season and realises he's too young to retire and starts angling for another coaching gig. After his effort with the Maroons in State of Origin, there is interest out there for him. However, we're tipping there will be an announcement about a second Brisbane team midway through the year and Bennett will become the face of the new franchise that will be ready to play in 2023.

COMEBACK 1 Jack Bird's career has been a write-off since he joined the Broncos three years ago. A return to his junior club St George Illawarra will see Bird finally play some football and show us the player who helped the Sharks win the 2016 premiership.

COMEBACK II Ryan James' signing might prove to be the most astute for 2021. I know he's coming off serious knee injuries, but James was pushing Origin selection a few years ago at the Titans and he joins a dominant Raiders pack. A fit and firing James will be dynamic alongside Josh Papalii.

OPEN AND SHUT CASE Despite concussion issues, Will Pucovski will establish himself as David Warner's Test opening partner and the new rising star of Australian cricket. They will form a great pairing.

JOINING BRADMAN Steve Smith has 26 Test centuries and I'm backing him in to score three more and join Sir Donald Bradman on 29 this year.

RADIO ACTIVE It's a big year for rugby league radio ratings. 2GB have dominated for a long period but losing Erin Molan is a huge blow, just 12 months after Continuous Call legends Ray Hadley and Bozo Fulton pulled the pin. There's not much opposition from the ABC but there's a new player in town, SEN, plus Triple M, who had great figures in the final survey of the footy season.

OUR BEN STOKES Cameron Green has made his ODI debut, but he will really make his mark as the all-rounder Australia has craved for decades. We have looked on with envy at Ben Stokes, but Green bowls 145km/h and they say he bats like Kevin Pietersen. That's a handy combo.

BOWLED GARRY Nathan Lyon (left) could get to 400 wickets in the second Test against India, confirming his place as the second-greatest Australian spinner behind Shane Warne. Only 33, Lyon will challenge Glenn McGrath's total of 563 Test wickets.

ROAD TO REVENGE Shame we've got to wait until Round 22 to see new Dragons coach Anthony Griffin tackle the Panthers, the club that sacked him before their chairman Dave "Uncle Nick" O'Neill signed Ivan Cleary.

GO GIRLS Who would have thought female jockeys would dominate racing like Rachel King and Jamie Kah? They are both outstanding riders with the strength and skill to match their male counterparts. They will make an even bigger impact in 2021 in Sydney and Melbourne racing.

QUEEN OF POOL Our 20-year-old rising superstar Ariarne Titmus has already beaten American legend Katy Ledecky once in the 400m freestyle. Delaying the Olympics for 12 months will only mean Ariarne is stronger and hungrier to take gold.

It will be one of the great head-to-head battles in Tokyo.

THE SISTERS A hope as much as a prediction, but let's cheer on Cate and Bronte Campbell as they sign off on their Olympic careers on the dais together after the 4x100m freestyle relay, with the team defending their Rio gold.

POOL PARTY Projections in a virtual 2020 Olympics had our swimmers giving England a bath and winning close to 20 medals in the pool. Our Olympic swimming trials are in June, but it is shaping as a great Olympics for Mack Horton now that the drugs controversy finally caught up with rival Sun Yang.

BOOMERS AT LAST After finishing fourth in four previous Olympics, it's time for Patty Mills and the boys to get their hands on that elusive medal. How COVID-19 affects the NBA and the Olympics remain a mystery - but it just might play into our hands.

BOARD GAMES Surfing will be one of the most popular event for Australians as it makes its Olympic debut. My fearless prediction is Steph Gilmore and Sally Fitzgibbons will end up competing against each other for a medal.

RUNNING MATES NSW's Jessica Hull is an emerging star of Australian track and field, breaking the national 5000m record which had stood for 18 years. She also took three seconds off the 3000m national record. She will breakthrough and make the 1500m final in Tokyo. Look out for Tasmania's Stewart McSweyn as well. He is our new Craig Mottram - an Aussie who can run with the might of Africa.

FACE OF THE GAMES With Immortals Usain Bolt and Michael Phelps no longer competing, the international face of the Tokyo Olympics won't come from the track or the pool - it will be American gymnast Simone Biles. Her smile will light up the world.

NRL Bottom 8 9 Bulldogs 10 Sea Eagles 11 Sharks 12 Broncos 13 Dragons 14 Warriors 15 Wests Tigers 16 Cowboys

NRL Top 8 1 Storm 2 Rabbitohs 3 Raiders 4 Eels 5 Roosters 6 Knights 7 Panthers 8 Titans

BEST SUMMER READS Sit back, chill and enjoy some of the finest words in a fantastic line-up of sporting books.

Tough Love The inspirational story of three-time world champion boxer Lovemore Ndou. When Lovemore stopped fighting in the ring he began fighting for justice, and he is now a successful Sydney lawyer specialising in criminal law and family law.

Cameron Smith The greatest rugby league player of all-time holds nothing back in his life story that is going absolutely gangbusters on all the bookstores.

Mike Colman One of my favourite all-time sports journos. It's a fantastic read including great yarns on Richie Benaud, Darren Lockyer, Glen Boss, Eddie Jones, Wendell Sailor and Andrew Symonds.

Unforgiven - Ash GrayAsh is a sub-editor at the Daily Tele who can even turn Dean 'Bulldog' Ritchie's copy into English. His book is the untold story of the rebel West Indian players who toured apartheid South Africa 40 years ago and how it affected their lives. It has already won a squillion awards.

SHORT & SHARP ■ Boyd Cordner - story of the year ■ Wayne Bennett farewell dinner at Grappa ■ Rabs to retire ■ Joseph Suaalii Dally M rookie of the year ■ An NRL coach to be sacked by Round 12 ■ Buddy Franklin to get injured

FIGHT FEAST At least two Australian boxing world champions by the end of 2021. Tim Tszyu needs to move up a gear and challenge some of the bigger names and belt holders.

Bashing up a way-past-his-best Jeff Horn and then Kiwi Bowyn Morgan at Bankwest Stadium still leaves question marks.

There will be some other great opportunities for Aussie fighters. Andrew Moloney will surely get another crack at Joshua Franco after being robbed in Las Vegas.

His twin brother Jason was outclassed by Japan's unified bantamweight champion Naoya 'Monster' Inoue but will come back strongly.

Heavyweight Justis Huni is the most exciting of the lot. He won the Australian title in his first professional fight then demolished previously undefeated Arsene Fosso six weeks later. He has extraordinary hand speed for a big man. An Olympic gold medal and a world title fight are his goals. Jeff Fenech's classy super bantamweight Brock Jarvis is also ready to go to the next level.
---
THE Gold CoastTitans have been put on notice, with Immortal Mal Meninga declaring new contracts won't be offered to underperforming players as the club weighs up a $3 million roster purge.

The Titans are anchored to the bottom of the NRL ladder after three rounds following Friday night's 36-6 defeat to North Queensland in Townsville.

The club has suffered three convincing defeats to start 2020, going down to the Raiders (18 points), Eels (40 points) and Cowboys (30 points) under new coach Justin Holbrook.

With 10 players off-contract at season's end, the Titans have a golden opportunity to overhaul the squad that collected last year's wooden spoon.

Captains Ryan James and Kevin Proctor, former NSW Origin hooker Nathan Peats and all-time leading tryscorer Anthony Don are among the players fighting for new deals.

But reputations will count for little when it comes to the negotiating table. Meninga, the Titans' head of performance and culture, said the players had to prove they were worthy of contract offers.

"All the players are fully aware they've got to play well to get another contract," he said.

"That's the way it is at the moment. It puts the club in a good position. We want to see players playing well and with strong belief in each other. We want them to be competitive.

"If they do that they deserve a contract. If they don't, that's the way it is." The Titans will lose Queensland Origin star Jai Arrow to South Sydney next season and the club's only confirmed 2021 recruit at this stage is rising Storm sensation Tino Fa'asuamaleaui. Meninga has highlighted Broncos young gun David Fifita as his prime recruitment target and the Titans are also on the hunt for an experienced leader.

Complicating the recruitment and retention decisions is fact the Intrust Super Cup season has been abandoned for 2020 due to COVID-19. Club captain James, the Titans' longest-serving player ever, will miss the entire 2020 season following knee surgery
---
Legacy of a man right for his times As James Morrow's brilliantly measured article rightly alluded to, the central issue with the Victorian deputy chief health officer's careless Twitter post is not that of free speech, but that of poor timing and historical inaccuracy - indeed, the First Fleet sailed into Botany Bay almost 10 years after the death of James Cook in Hawaii (The case for Cook, Saturday Extra, 2/5).

There is also a more significant, perhaps uncomfortable, elephant in the room, which needs to be addressed: Australian citizens - whether of European, indigenous, Asian or other heritage - appreciate and desire the fruits of European settlement.

The majority of us greatly appreciate such social facets as our rule of law, modern medicine, just governance, police force and public schooling; in short, the civil blessings birthed through the propagation of Western culture.

For better or worse, the Endeavour's arrival in 1770 set in motion a cultural chain of events which today are encapsulated in what Noel Pearson accurately affirmed two years ago in his Declaration of Australia; the three strands of our grand social narrative: an indigenous foundation, British institutions and a modern-day multicultural character.

As we continue to civilly appraise our past and navigate our future, we need to reserve a space for acknowledging how much of our present-day state of affairs are due to the extraordinary naval achievements and academic acquirements of a man who was just right for the time.

Peter Waterhouse, Craigieburn, Vic

China report welcomed I live in the United States and just read your report on the coronavirus case against China (China's risky bat business, 2/5).

Thank you for saying what had to be said. Some of the press in the United States and some in Europe dare not stand up to China.

Even my 17-year-old son agrees wholeheartedly with your report. Go Australia. May, USA

Let's keep downloading it Clare Armstrong's report on Saturday quotes statistics that (as of the time of writing) 3.6 million people had downloaded the COVIDSafe app. The article also states that 6.8 million people have received a one-off payment of $750 thus far (Appy days to be free at last, 2/5).

That is a difference of 3.2 million people who have gladly taken the $750 handout but have not done the right thing by downloading the app to help save lives Perhaps if you don't want to download it for whatever reason, you should demonstrate your displeasure and give back the $750 in protest?

Any takers? Didn't think so!

Further, if you take the $1500 jobseeker payment or any other leg- up from the government, then it's a tad hypocritical to bite the hand that feeds you by not heeding the calls to help get our lives back on track.

Do the right thing. Get Australia moving again. Download the COVIDSafe app, get over yourself and whatever Big Brother or woke nonsense you bang on about and think of others, OK.

John Partridge, Manly

We're still in the Hunt I have always admired Greg Hunt a good bloke with integrity, respect and a calm and calming demeanour, especially when he was spectacularly betrayed recently by Andrew Forrest at his COVID update press conference.

Now to learn of his childhood trauma growing up with his bipolar mother it makes me like and respect him even more.

And to think we could have lost him to politics when Julia Banks contested his seat at the last election, well done Flinders voters you re-elected a truly great man.

Marg Swindells, Castle Hill

Trust starts with the home The government want us to trust them with the COVIDSafe app yet here we have a senior cabinet member, Peter Dutton, Minister for Home Affairs (not his own), failing to declare a million-dollar property in Townsville on the pecuniary interest register required for our elected members of parliament (Dutton's million-dollar 'mistake', 2/5).

How many times do we have to hear from politicians that it was an oversight, common mistake, or the other one - of human error.

You would think, with so many previous problems for politicians, that Mr Dutton would get his own home affairs in order first.

Perhaps we might be able to trust them on this app but not their own investments.

Ian Cleland, Blackett

Crazy signs in crazy times Look out people, the weirdos are coming out of hibernation.

We have a foolish, misinformed bureaucrat comparing Cook's landing to COVID-19, overpaid footballers chucking tantrums over their too generous pays.

We have had some Australians appearing to put the People's Republic of China ahead of the concerns of our country, and just as we look at kickstarting our struggling economy, along comes a misguided independent politician trying to block the much-needed Narrabri gas project, along with other developments that we desperately need in these trying times. We also seem to have the teachers union reluctant to get kids back to school. Crazy people and crazy times.

But, on another note, hats off to Penny Wong for publicly backing Scott Morrison's wishes for an independent inquiry into the origin and spread of this deadly disease. Nice to see a Labor Party member with common sense!

Munzy, Singleton

Backlash will only get worse With China continuing to deny the world the opportunity to conduct an independent inquiry into the source of coronavirus and making threats on trade to those countries that criticise them the backlash against them will continue to escalate.

The longer China adopts this stance the more suspicion of culpability will be raised and the more the world will lose respect for them. It is not just Australia that is calling them to task - the world is lining up behind our Prime Minister's call.

John Spackman, Kyogle

Put end to science links Immediately, there should be no Chinese scientists working on exchange in Australia (China's batty science, 2/5).

These scientists are people who obviously enjoy scientific pursuit and are probably honest individuals. However, they answer, when the Chinese Communist Party directs them, in whatever way it wants.

Paul McMurray, Epping

Distancing on the roads The people of the ACT have done remarkably well with social distancing with the COVID-19 cases well in hand.

All we need now is to apply the same concept to the driving population and their world champion status as tailgaters.

With the best roads in the country, it's a too common sight to see in your rear view mirror the wild stares and white knuckles a couple of metres from your rear bumper.

If tailgating was an Olympic sport Canberra would win gold, silver and bronze. Bruce Collison, Banks, ACT

Briefly … The shocking abuse and attacks on Asian Australians during the coronavirus pandemic is a blot on the nation's multiracialism and democracy. All right-thinking Australians must stand together to combat this racist virus.

R Naidu, Glenfield "" " Once this is all over, will the government be prepared for the influx of mature age students seeking to job re-train - as teachers?

Jim, Springwood "" " It is interesting to hear that Korean leader Kim Jong-un has been seen at a fertiliser factory, as the rumours of his possible death had a smell of horse manure.

Dennis Fitzgerald, Box Hill, Vic

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily TelegraphGPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
THE COVID FILES VIRUS ORIGINS TWO Chinese scientists - who western intelligence agencies are looking into as part of their probe into the origins of the global coronavirus contagion - studied live bats in Australia in research jointly funded by the Australian and Chinese governments.

An investigation by The Daily Telegraph can reveal the Five Eyes intelligence agencies of Australia, Canada, NZ, UK and US, are understood to be looking closely at the work of a senior scientist at the Wuhan Institute of Virology, Peng Zhou, as they examine whether COVID-19 originated from a wet market or whether the naturally--occurring virus may have been released from the level four laboratory in Wuhan that was studying deadly coronavirus pathogens from bats.

The revelation comes as Australian politicians ramp up pressure on China to co--operate with an international investigation into the origins of the COVID-19 outbreak.

Chair of the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security, Andrew Hastie said: "The Chinese Communist Party must take responsibility for the virus that began inside their borders and work with the rest of the world to prevent it from happening again. We are simply asking for transparency and co-operation." The Australian government's position is the virus most likely originated from the Wuhan wet markets but it is possible it was accidentally released from a laboratory.

It can be revealed that Zhou - the head of the Bat Virus Infection and Immunity Project at the Wuhan Institute of Virology - spent three years at the bio-containment facility, Australian Animal Health Laboratory between 2011 and 2014, where he was sent by China to complete his doctorate.

During this time, Zhou arranged for wild-caught bats to be transported alive by air from Queensland to the Australian Animal Health Laboratory in Victoria where they were euthanised for dissection and studied for deadly viruses.

His work was funded jointly by the CSIRO and the Chinese Academy of Sciences. It examined bat immunology and the role of interferons and how "bats are rich reservoirs for emerging viruses, including many that are highly pathogenic to humans and other mammals" and "many of which cause significant morbidity and mortality in humans and other mammals."

HIGHLY-RISKY WORK The research is designed to prevent the next pandemic by understanding how viruses can be transmitted from bats to humans to cause coronaviruses. But the work is considered highly-risky and there have been fears in recent years that any inadvertent leak could cause a worldwide pandemic.

The other scientist being looked at is Shi Zhengli, who is the director of the Centre for Emerging Infectious Diseases at the Chinese Academy of Sciences' Wuhan Institute of Virology. Zhengli also spent time in Australia as a visiting scientist for three months from February 22 to May 21, 2006 where she worked at the CSIRO's top-level Australian Animal Health Laboratory.

She used faecal samples of horseshoe bats to identify that they were the natural host for SARS-like coronaviruses.

When the COVID-19 outbreak occurred in Wuhan, Zhengli said she had sleepless nights worrying whether it was released from her laboratory - but has since strongly denied this occurred.

The Daily Telegraph does not suggest the two scientists are responsible for the outbreak or spread of COVID-19, but merely that they have come to the attention of intelligence agencies.

On November 18 last year, shortly before the outbreak, Zhou posted a postdoctoral recruitment notice looking for one or two candidates to study the "unique mechanism of innate immunity in bats." In it, according to a translation done by The Daily Telegraph, Zhou offered the opportunity for "academic exchanges and research at home and abroad".

The CSIRO and the Australian Animal Health Laboratory have collaborated with China in numerous jointly-funded research projects into bat diseases, with scientists travelling back and forth between the two laboratories.

WARNINGS ON LAB The research into bats and coronaviruses at the Wuhan Institute of Virology has been considered high-risk amid concerns about the practices at the laboratory.

A "Sensitive but Unclassified" cable, dated January 19, 2018, obtained by The Washington Post, revealed that US embassy scientists and diplomats in Beijing visited the laboratory and met with Zhengli.

They sent warnings back to Washington about inadequate safety practices and management weaknesses as it conducted research on coronaviruses from bats. According to the Post, the cable "warns that the lab's work on bat coronaviruses and their potential human transmission represented a risk of a new SARS-like pandemic".

"During interactions with scientists at the WIV laboratory, they noted the new lab has a serious shortage of appropriately trained technicians and investigators needed to safely operate this high-containment laboratory," the cable stated.

A CSIRO spokesman said it had partnered with China in "excellent research and development for over 40 years".

"While there is no current research on bats at ACDP, the suggestion bat research is dangerous without context … is misleading and irresponsible," he said. "Research into bats underpins much of our understanding of zoonotic diseases. CSIRO undertakes due diligence and takes security very seriously."

PROBE MUST OCCUR The US Ambassador to Australia, Arthur B. Culvahouse Jr. told The Daily Telegraph the origins of the outbreak need to be investigated, adding that the phone call between Donald Trump and Scott Morrison on April 22 showed there is "no daylight" between the US and Australia's position on a probe.

"I commend Foreign Minister (Marise) Payne and her call for a hard, dispassionate look at the origins of the epidemic," he said. "This isn't about pointing fingers. It is about what could have been done better to prevent the disease, communicate its existence and prevent it from becoming a global pandemic.

"Sadly, this won't be the last novel virus the world faces. To do better in the future, we will need to fully understand what happened in the past. I fully support (the) calls for transparency and accountability from (Australia)."

WHO'S WHO IN WUHAN Peng Zhou Number two in the 'bat unit'fat the Wuhan Institute off Virology. July 2011 until July 2014: Worked at the Australian Animal Health Laboratory and Biosecurity Business Unit.

Zhou was sent to the Australian Animal Health Laboratory and Biosecurity Business Unit by China to complete doctorate.

Shi Zhengli Director of the Centre for Emerging Infectious Diseases at the Chinese Academy of Sciences' Wuhan Institute of Virology.

February 22 - May 21, 2006: Visiting scientist in Australia working at the CSIRO's top-level Australian Animal Health Laboratory.

At the CSIRO she used faecal samples of horseshoe bats to identify that they were a natural host for SARS-like coronavirus.

When COVID-19 broke out in Wuhan she worried it was released from her laboratory but has since strongly denied this occurred.

November 18 2019 Zhou posted a postdoctoral requirements notice looking for candidates to study the "unique mechanism of innate immunity in bats" - offering academic exchanges and research at home and abroad.

The United States embassy scientists and diplomats met Zhengli at the laboratory and sent warnings back to Washington, dated January 19 2018, about inadequate safety practices for research being conducted on bats.

PART TWO TOMORROWThe cost of coronavirus
---
ACTING Prime Minister Michael McCormack has backed World Health Organisation investigators to "get the answers they need" despite fears China will attempt to impede a probe into the coronavirus.

The World Health Organisation's (WHO) international team has touched down in Wuhan, China to investigate the origins of COVID-19, first detected in the city in late 2019.

Australia called for the investigation in April, a move widely viewed as triggering months of escalating trade tensions -between Canberra and Beijing.

Mr McCormack downplayed suggestions the WHO's arrival would hamper efforts to mend relations. "Our phone lines are always open, our doors are always open (to Beijing)," he said. "As far as diplomatic relations with China and trade are concerned, I know how important it is for producers … to ensure we continue our trade with China, which is worth $149.6 billion." Concerns have been raised over Beijing's willingness to allow a transparent investigation after it temporarily blocked investigators from entering, citing visa approval issues.

Mr McCormack would not be drawn on whether Beijing would attempt to impede the probe but backed WHO to conduct its work "very diligently".

"I'm sure that the WHO, being the robust organisation that it is, will make sure that its inquiries are what they need to be," he said. "They will … undertake their work in the most professional manner. I'm sure they'll come up with the answers they need." Mr McCormack also pushed back against one of the more bizarre salvos in the trade stoush after Beijing criticised Australian cherries for being "inferior … in taste and quality" compared with their Chilean equivalents.

"(Australian cherries) are the best. You want to get stuck into them, they're great: red, juicy and plump," he said. World page 72
---
Crowning argument a winner THE inquiry commissioner Patricia Bergin's adverse report on Crown's current management running the Barangaroo Crown Casino, due, in part, to links to money laundering and criminal syndicates involved in "junkets", brings a question mark over other casino operations, including The Star Casino, Sydney; Crown Casino in Melbourne and the Crown Burswood Casino in Perth (Casino too much of a gamble, 10/2).

 If a similar inquiry was run against these casinos, would the inquiry commissioner find the same or similar issues?

Keith Range, Winston Hills

THE correlation between casinos and corruption has been understood for decades yet it would appear that the backroom deal between Barry O'Farrell then NSW Premier and Jamie Packer in 2012 giving Crown inside running without scrutiny is just grist for the mill (Casino too much of a gamble, 10/2. The rest, of course, is now history after the Bergin report concerning Crown in NSW.

 It should be noted that many of the references relating to unconscionable conduct have been derived from Crown operations in Victoria, apparently under the noses of Victorian regulators who have neither seen, heard or spoken about such matters.

Greg Angelo, Balwyn North, Vic

WHO, when, why and how unanswered So the World Health Organisation (WHO) has found it difficult to find conclusive evidence on the origins of COVID-19 (WHO fails virus test, 10/2).

 Some of that uncertainty would be due to the lengthy period of time taken to investigate the situation and stalling tactics applied by the Chinese government.

 The W.H.O. has formed an opinion of WHEN the virus was exposed; it cannot be sure HOW it was released, WHERE it actually came from, or WHO is responsible.

 Most of the world understands WHY the virus was unleashed, but perhaps not WHY organisations like the W.H.O. are necessary.

 In this current pandemic, they have been found wanting on a number of fronts, notably any form of true leadership in difficult times.

Geoff Simmonds, Strathfield South

State of play Daniel Andrews has the gall to say his COVID systems are superior to NSW (Infections make mockery of Dan's defence, 10/2).

 Who presided over the more than 800 deaths, who had a Health Minister resign in disgust at the way the quarantine hotels were being managed, who had an inquiry into the debacle and nobody could recall who had responsibility for the problem, who closed his borders requiring everyone to obtain a permit to enter, whose state racked up another three infections this week, who refuses to share the load of incoming passengers in his hotels, who uses spin over substance and who wants his residents to think he is doing a good job when most of us know that he isn't.

 Please Mr Andrews have another look at the efficient way Gladys Berejiklian is managing our state before you sprout your political waffle. Our Premier is correct in not lowering herself to respond to his nonsense.

Marg Swindells, Castle Hill

Reassurance needed As I remember it, the government's solution to reducing COVID cases in quarantine was to reduce arrival numbers for four weeks and require travellers to provide proof of a negative test result before boarding a plane to Australia from January 22. Before arrival numbers increase from February 15, how about the government assures us that the required testing at departure airports is actually occurring?

Faye Wheatley, Picnic Point

Strange decision Poor Dr Barnardo, how would he feel about all this nonsense (Charity shelves mother's award for diversity, 9/2)?

 How long before it will not be recognised that women give birth and that makes them into mothers?  So many women bypass the birth through reasons unknown, but go on to help many children who have not been fortunate enough to be born into a family with a loving and caring "mother".

 Where would the children be if not for these wonderful women that we label mothers?

 How about we stop giving awards for petty things that in everyday life is normal behaviour and just award outstanding contributions to life.

Ruth Christie, Revesby

Diverse reaction Children's charity Barnardos has axed its Mother of The Year award after 25 years because it does not celebrate other caregivers like same sex parents and grandparents (Charity shelves mother's award for diversity, 9/2).

 It would seem that this diverse group has placed pressure on Barnardos to axe the Mother of the Year award with a view to making an award that recognises all care givers. As institutions continue to be besieged by progressive activism it cannot be very long before Mother's Day will come under attack for being too traditional and not inclusive.

 Every day, in every country, you will see compelling examples of unwavering, unyielding, uninterrupted commitment of mothers to their children and families. The unconditional love a mother has for a child is its own reward Peter Penglis, Kambah, ACT

Days of a fair go are gone What a country we are turning into - motherhood under question (Mum's the word, 9/2), and the woke brigade forcing Eddie McGuire out of a job after 23 years (Eddie says bye bye Pies, 10/2), with no evidence of racist behaviour for the past eight years.

 The days of a fair go are gone. When is someone going to stand up and tell these whingers to go jump or are we going to keep caving in to every complaint?

Denis Walford, Kiama

Another scalp Eddie McGuire's scalp is now nailed to the cancel culture's post with many more to be added as the woke offended find every which way to pull down the Israel Folaus and the Margaret Courts of this new age world we find ourselves living in John Partridge, Manly

Waste of paint If our politicians would enable our police force to police rather than spend time doing administrative functions and raising revenue they wouldn't be ignoring petty crime such as graffiti (Mural vandals given a spray, 10/2).

 Petty crime costs someone, but it is all too often left unattended by police. Getting away with petty crime encourages moving to more serious crime.

Bruce, Gosford

Food for thought Why are we dumping all of our fruit and vegetables because we can't bring in workers to pick it? What about using some of the people on JobSeeker - rural districts have a very high youth unemployment? Or do we just keep putting up with weak governments?

Chris Weeks, Moorebank

Briefly ...

I'm not at all concerned about Donald Trump's impeachment, but if there is a Mr Pelosi I sure feel sorry for him.

Barry Laurie, Tweed Heads

* * * The World Health Organisation has failed to discover the origins of coronavirus. Surprise, surprise.

David Davies, Newcastle

* * * The number of times I hear the word unprecedented these days is unprecedented. Sam Saidden, Parramatta

* * * Word play for Peter Waterhouse (Letters, 10/2). Just like to poynt out that Peter has spelled the word kount wen we all no it shood be cownt. Consentrait Peter.

Tony Wilkinson, Surfers Paradise, Qld

* * * Reading about how Crown has been found unfit to hold a licence, a question came to mind: is Crown just a subsidiary of some Chinese laundry business?

Richard Merrell, Penrith

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
Albury-Wodonga is the front line of NSW's battle to stop a second wave of coronavirus devastating our state. Clare Armstrong reports on the locals already paying the price A wave of fear and confusion swept through NSW border towns when it was announced that every bridge into the state would be locked down to stop a new wave of coronavirus infections spreading from Melbourne.

Authorities had less than 48 hours to pull together the massive operation after an early morning phone hook-up on July 6 between Premier Gladys Berejiklian, Victorian Premier Dan Andrews and Prime Minister Scott Morrison when the leaders finally agreed the border should close.

Ms Berejiklian had earlier resisted calls to do so, in large part due to concern about the impact of a lockdown on twin towns like Albury and Wodonga dotted along the border.

But now, after Victoria failed to contain several clusters of outbreaks, the border city is itself worried about a second wave of COVID-19, fuelled by cases of community transmission with unknown origin.

Daily new case reports from Victoria have been hitting triple digits in the last week, while a new phrase "seeding" - meaning the spread of the virus from one community to another - has entered the public health lexicon.

Asked to put a number on how likely it was the virus would escape over the NSW border from Melbourne, Deputy Chief Medical Officer Dr Nick Coatsworth this week said, "100 per cent".

Unidentified sources But the handful of cases among the contacts of returned travellers from Melbourne aren't necessarily the biggest concern for health authorities.

Provided those who have been in coronavirus hot spots over the last fortnight follow health orders to self isolate, it's the risk of underlying as yet unidentified community transmission that poses the real risk.

It will be at least two weeks before officials will really know if the virus is already reproducing between low or asymptomatic carriers in the communities around southern NSW.

Along with the logistical challenges presented by the checkpoint system, NSW border residents are also experiencing a resurgence in fear about the risk of getting sick.

The first morning NSW shut the roads in, Albury locals were dismayed to find a popular cafe on the Murray River bank - metres from the state of Victoria - had reverted back to "takeaway only".

It was a shock to the system for a community that had largely been COVID-free throughout the pandemic, and expected to be increasingly enjoying the successes of NSW in suppressing the virus rather than taking a step back.

Further inland, Murray River Council Mayor Chris Bilkey describes the situation as "organised chaos" - a necessary evil to safeguard community health at the expense of ailing border towns like Moama in NSW and Echucha in Victoria.

"Already the economic impact on Moama has been significant, we get all our tourists from Melbourne and Geelong and that has just fallen off a cliff," he says.

"You can't hear yourself think for cancellations coming through." The business community at least is aware of what to expect this time around, with many able to flick the switch to deal with a more high-risk setting at short notice.

AgBoss owner Jenny Jensen says her family's company, which manufactures plastic farming equipment in Albury, is seriously considering returning to operating the factory in two separate shifts.

At the height of the first wave of the pandemic, one team would clock on at 6am and then thoroughly sanitise the factory floor at 3pm ready for the second shift of workers who operated through to midnight.

Fighting uncertainty As restrictions eased the business had reverted to its normal routine, but Ms Jensen says the company could switch back to the COVID system within a day if it comes to it.

"Farmers are finally on a bit of a roll with the rain so it's important we can guarantee the supply chain if the coronavirus situation gets worse," she says.

Her son Scott Jensen says the most important thing is minimising the impact on staff. With a second premises at another border town down the road, he's concerned about the pressure the COVID-19 measures are placing on their lives.

"The uncertainty does take its toll," he says.

In the Albury CBD, shop owner Barry Young is grappling with the reality of losing half his customer base overnight.

His food and homewares store, The Essential Ingredient, had just started to pick up trade as the easing of restrictions breathed life into the town's centre, but now it's back to facing more unknowns.

"Any perishable food we have to do the orders every two weeks, but the uncertainty at the moment really impacts that," he says.

With Wodonga residents urged not to cross over to Albury and the broader NSW community told to avoid border towns, Mr Young says the next few months will be tough.

But it's not only business decisions impacted by the border closure. Checkpoint Charlie 2.0 Wodonga resident Pam Stevens is "very worried" the border measures will impact her ability to care for her elderly parents in Albury.

"I come over three or four times a week to take them to appointments, bring meals and do shopping," she says.

What was once a 15-minute trip - easy to fit in after work or on a lunch break - can now take up to an hour with the delays caused by the border checkpoint.

Her parents Collin and Marie Roddy say they rely on their daughter and don't want to be cut off from her.

"Pam helps us with paying bills on the computer and things so without her here it would be a worry," Ms Roddy says. "It seems rather unfair that we are being impacted by the Melbourne situation." Being left at the mercy of health officials trying to limit the impact of an incident in Melbourne is a place Albury has found itself before.

There's a chilling symmetry with the events of the Spanish flu pandemic more than 100 years ago, and the efforts to stem the deadly COVID-19 outbreak today.

In November 1918, the federal government called a planning conference involving all the states to "agree upon a uniform scheme of operations for adoption in the event of an epidemic occurring in any part of Australia".

Bad memories At this conference, it was decided should a state be proclaimed as infected with the Spanish flu, the borders will be shut.

The highest risk to NSW at the time was soldiers returning from World War I, so international travellers were quarantined in Sydney to protect the community.

But in early 1919 a soldier recently returned from Europe travelled from Melbourne to Sydney by boat where he was then diagnosed with the flu on January 24.

Seven more people became infected, and by January 29, NSW closed the border to Victoria.

Public meetings were banned, hotels and racecourses closed, and health practitioners were given the power to restrict people's movement, particularly those who were close contacts of a confirmed Spanish flu case.

Quarantine camps were set up in Albury where people wanting to cross the border had to stay in a tent for a week.

Wearing face masks and free inoculations became normal life for the community. At the time one newspaper dubbed Albury the "city of the dead" reporting people in NSW were too scared to visit.

Residents in 2020 are living out a scenario in eerie parallel with their ancestors.

Albury Northside Chamber of Commerce general manager Carrick Gill-Valance is worried about the effect the Victorian outbreak could have on people's perception of the NSW town.

"The perception of Albury when things do open up again could be that people aren't confident or willing to come here because they see us as a hot spot," he says.

The border closure has no end date, and those who cross from Victoria must isolate unless they carry an exemption permit.

About 650 police and 350 Australian Defence Force personnel are guarding the crossing points with road blocks, checkpoints and drones.

Dozens of NSW Police officers shiver through the freezing night shift, waving drivers up to the check point to examine their border permit, licence and interrogate their supporting documents.

Cold wind blows The cold bite of the southern winter caught many of the normally Sydney-based officers by surprise, with NSW Police Commissioner Mick Fuller on Thursday announcing a shipment of more 2000 thermal clothes, beanies and gloves was being delivered to the border.

It's indicative of the fluid nature of the rapid police response. Issues are identified and addressed as they arise.

Mr Fuller says it's all in aid of protecting not just the NSW border residents, but the Victorian ones as well.

"There are some real consequences if we get this wrong for both the communities, and there's a huge impact on the people of NSW, who have really gotten this right," he said of the state's ongoing relative success containing the virus.

In the wake of Australia's success flattening the coronavirus curve, former chief medical officer Professor Brendan Murphy admitted it was the risk of a "second wave" of the disease that he feared most.

NSW is in no way in the throes of a second wave, and even nationally the rate of cases remains incredibly low comparable to international examples, such as the US which this week surpassed three million cases and 132,000 deaths, But 100 years ago it was the later peaks of Spanish flu that did the most damage in Australia.

Up until the middle of March 1919, only 50 people had died across NSW, while the second wave killed 1542 and the third 4302, peaking between the end of June and early July. Only time will tell if the decision of today's NSW government to close the border to Victoria came soon enough to stem the flow of coronavirus from Melbourne.
---
IT is the $179 backyard basketball ring that has slam-dunked rugby league tradition by turning a left-edge forward into a potent aerial try-scoring weapon.

In a bid to improve his leaping and agility, Panthers forward Viliame Kikau was asked by club head of performance Hayden Knowles to practise basketball slam-dunking at the local courts during the COVID-19 shutdown.

When the courts were closed due to coronavirus, Kikau shelled out $179 for a basketball hoop in his own Western Sydney backyard.

The 118kg behemoth filmed himself flying through the air to dunk and sent it to Knowles.

"It just showed ridiculous athleticism. He is a freakish athlete," Knowles said. "He has actually used the break to get better." Kikau used his skills to good effect on the weekend when he leapt to grab a Nathan Cleary bomb and score the match-winning try against Melbourne.

He has essentially become the first forward to become what is known as an offence kick target. Knowles even sent the footage of Kikau's backyard basketball exploits to teammates in an effort to encourage them to improve their agility work.

South Sydney have completed their homework on the Kikau high jump before tonight's big game at Jubilee Oval, Kogarah.

"In the break, we encouraged the boys to stay athletic by sending video around to everyone of Kikau slam- dunking a basketball," Knowles said.

"I was using 'Kiks' to inspire the rest of the squad. That video of him - at 118kg, a single-leg jump, take-off and slam-dunk a basketball on a 10-foot ring - it just showed ridiculous athleticism. It's so impressive.

"He is now a kick target, isn't he? Last week they were probably covering the kick for (Panthers centre) Stephen Crichton and the next minute Kikau flew in to catch the ball.

"That just gives the opposition more of a threat. Usually you're worried about wingers and centres. Now you're worried about Kikau as well.

"I encouraged him to play basketball in the break. He started doing it in the Penrith area until council ripped down the basketball rings during the COVID break, so he bought some rings for his own backyard.

"He has no shame in letting you know he can slam-dunk a basketball. He probably takes pride in that.

"I had a separate WhatsApp group over the break - which was all about athletic development and challenging each other - and I sent them Kikau slam-dunking a basketball.

"A wrecking ball who can do that. It was pretty cool." Kikau has become one of the NRL's most damaging players. Sadly, he arrived in Australia from Fiji at age 16 and is ineligible for Origin.

With a "flying mop" haircut, Kikau is preparing to terrorise the Rabbitohs. "He comes in weighing 118kg and you hear that number and think that could be a bit overweight," Knowles said. "But when he takes his shirt off, you're looking at a six-pack. Kikau is a freakish talent. We love him.

"He has always been focused but has really latched on to the influence of James Fisher-Harris and Zane Tetevano. He has taken their lead. Instead of me being on his back, he would have Fisher-Harris on his back, or Tetevano, to go training.

"Kikau is doing more of the effort-type stuff people mightn't know him for. He is fitter than normal. He made a decision in the break to get better and he's turned into a better player. We love his attitude." After last week's game, Panthers coach Ivan Cleary spoke glowingly about Kikau. "Villie is a pretty special type of specimen," Cleary said. "He is 118kg or whatever and we have all seen some of the stuff he can do. He is only young too so it is good times ahead." Cleary has a terrible record against South Sydney's Wayne Bennett, winning just three of their past 15 clashes.
---
AN advertisement that highlights the virtues of being confined to Australia after someone "ate a bat" has been cleared by an official investigation, although some who scrutinised the commercial believed it incited contempt and ridicule of China and Chinese people.

The ad, for outdoor equipment company BCF, also -depicts a caucasian man eating a bat burger.

One complaint highlighted in the new Ad Standards Bureau's community panel report said: "This is ... scientifically -inaccurate but my complaint is ... implied racism against China, even if the depiction is not a Chinese person." BCF told the panel its ad was aimed at encouraging -people to enjoy Australia and stay positive.

"Whilst eating a burger with a bat inside can be interpreted to reference the suspected origin of COVID-19, it is a lighthearted scenario intended to be humorous in nature and in no way references race or ethnicity," BCF said.

A minority of panel members found the ad breached the section of Australian Association of National Advertisers' code of ethics that prohibits discrimination or vilification.

"The minority of the panel noted that there has been an increase in negative community opinion towards China since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, and considered that this advertisement reinforces casual racism directed at Chinese people by implying that they are strange and that their strange habits (eating bats) caused a global pandemic.

"The minority considered that the advertisement does -incite contempt and ridicule towards China and Chinese people and is a breach of the code," the panel report said.

But the majority concluded "that showing a person eating a bat as part of a sandwich is a humorous reference to what was widely believed to be the source of the COVID-19 pandemic - the animal to human transfer of the disease in a wildlife market in China.

"The majority considered that using such a reference was lighthearted and comedic, and was not discriminatory." The panel report said the majority noted that a Chinese person was not used in the -advertisement, but "rather a man wearing a wide brimmed hat and holding a fishing rod - intended to be stereo-typically Australian." A poll of more than 4000 people on The Daily Telegraph website found 86 per cent of respondents considered the complaints to be baseless. BCF declined to comment on the Ad Standards report.
---
CHINA has bizarrely enlisted Abraham Lincoln, the US president best known for freeing the slaves, as its newest foot soldier in its campaign to deflect responsibility for allowing COVID-19 to infect millions of people and send the world's economy into a tailspin.

In a rambling manifesto posted on the website of the Chinese consulate in Auckland entitled "Reality Check of US Allegations Against China on COVID-19", the document accuses "US politicians and media outlet of fabricating preposterous allegations and lies" - and then goes on to attribute a quote to Lincoln (pictured): "You can fool all the people some of the time, and some of the people all the time, but you cannot fool all the people all the time." Among the claims made in the document is that it is improper to name diseases after their origin - ignoring the fact many including Ross River Fever, Lyme disease and ebola were named after where they were discovered.

The document also claims that Wuhan may not have been the source of the virus at all, and that the Chinese government did everything it could to stop its spread. Never mind the fact that China is stonewalling an investigation into the origin of the virus, threatening Australian farmers over the issue and is further thought to have destroyed samples and suppressed news to make it more difficult to find out what really happened.

Other claims are similarly fantastical, including that whistleblower Dr Li Wenliang was not arrested for attempting to warn of the coming pandemic, but was simply "taken to a police station ... and urged … to stop spreading unconfirmed information".Oh, one more thing. According to QuoteInvestigator.com, Lincoln "probably did not employ this well-known adage". Another fact China failed to get right.
---
… AND WHO'S AVAILABLE IF COACH OF LOSING CLUB IN TOMORROW'S CLASH IS SHOWN THE DOOR REVEALED These 14 names prove just how cut-throat the world of NRL coaching is. Ahead of what is a must-win game for under-pressure St George Illawarra mentor Paul McGregor and Canterbury's Dean Pay, DAVID RICCIO and MICHAEL CARAYANNIS reveal which coach is ready to replace them.

Trent Barrett Penrith assistant coach A former captain and Dally M winner at the Dragons after making his debut for the Steelers. The ex-Country Origin coach had mixed success during his three-year stint in charge of the Sea Eagles, which ended in 2018, when he had strong support from his playing group. Returned to the Panthers as an assistant coach this year and has also been part of the NSW coaching set-up in recent years.

Wayne Bennett Rabbitohs head coach The Bennett-Back-to-the-Dragons rumour won't go away.

But know this, if Bennett does return to where he won the premiership in 2010, he would need to regain the trust of owner and WIN chairman Andrew Gordon.

It was Gordon who Bennett backflipped on in the space of 24 hours in 2014. At Newcastle, Bennett said he'd quit to rejoin the Dragons in 2015, but reneged the next day to sign with Brisbane. The frugal Gordons are also only willing to pay a head coach around $500,000 - which is below Bennett's asking price.

Nathan Brown Consultant to the Warriors prior to COVID-19 restrictions On the hunt for a full-time NRL coaching role after quitting as coach of the Knights last year.

A former Dragons player and coach, Brown shares an extremely tight relationship with St George Illawarra Dragons director Peter Doust. The board that will decide the next coach.

Cameron Ciraldo Penrith assistant coach.

Considered one of the best young coaches in the game with an ambition to become an NRL coach. Clearly others see that, too, given he replaced Anthony Griffin in the final six weeks of the 2018 season, winning three from six matches. In 2019, he was pipped by Cronulla coach John Morris for the Sharks job.

Craig Fitzgibbon Roosters and NSW Blues assistant coach Dapto's favourite son and the man who Andrew Johns says should lead the Dragons revival.

Widely considered the next cab off the rank as far as NRL coaches go, he is defence-focused and boasts Trent Robinson's tutelage.

Interestingly, he's managed by David Riolo, the same agent as Paul McGregor.

Shane Flanagan St George-Illawarra assistant coach Peter V'landys said this week he wouldn't reduce Flanagan's head-coaching ban short to help fix the Dragons' problems. In addition, the NRL has confirmed to The Sunday Telegraph the premiership-winning coach hasn't applied to the NRL to coach the Red V or any club before the scheduled relaxation of his ban in 2022.

Anthony Griffin Former Brisbane, Penrith coach Was dramatically cut adrift as Penrith coach late in 2018 despite being on track for a finals appearance. Has a very strong coaching record, making the finals in each of his three full seasons at Penrith and three of his four years at Brisbane before being replaced by Wayne Bennett.

Todd Payten Warriors assistant coach Has served a long apprenticeship first at his former club the Wests Tigers before spending five years at the Cowboys as part of their premiership-winning coaching staff. Joined the Warriors last year. Learnt his trade playing under Tim Sheens at the Tigers. Highly regarded as a future NRL coach.

Steve Price Head coach Warrington Kicking goals in the UK Super League, Price has matured and developed immensely since being appointed head coach of the Dragons in 2012 at the age of 34.

The defensive coach for Cronulla in their 2016 premiership season, Price led Warrington to victory in last year's Challenge Cup Final.

Jason Ryles Storm assistant coach Ryles, who played for St George-Illawarra, the Roosters and the Storm as well as Super League side Catalans, is leaving Melbourne in November to work for England rugby union coach Eddie Jones as the national side's skills coach.

The move is all part of his learnings to become an NRL coach and remains deeply connected to the Dragons through his close mateship with Paul McGregor, Shaun Timmins and Mark Riddell.

Dean Young St George-Illawarra assistant coach The good oil suggests the son of Dragons football club board member Craig Young is the frontrunner to step up should Paul McGregor be moved on.

While he's been on the Dragons NRL coaching staff since 2015, the risk with Young is that the Red V would be appointing a rookie coach with no external experience in a time of crisis.

Geoff Toovey Former Manly grand final coach Had terrific success at his former club Manly, leading them to a premiership decider in his first season. Despite a 58 per cent winning record, was shown the door at the end of 2015. Hasn't landed a major coaching gig since, but did have a short stint coaching Bradford in the English lower tier. Has been out of the coaching game for a while, which will count against him.

Nathan Brown Consultant to the Warriors prior to COVID-19 restrictions On the hunt for a full-time NRL coaching role after quitting as coach of the Knights last year.

A former Dragons player and coach, Brown shares an extremely tight relationship with St George Illawarra Dragons director Peter Doust. The board that will decide the next coach.

Jason Ryles Storm assistant coach Ryles, who played for St George-Illawarra, the Roosters and the Storm as well as Super League side Catalans, is leaving Melbourne in November to work for England rugby union coach Eddie Jones as the national side's skills coach. The move is all part of his learnings to become an NRL coach and remains deeply connected to the Dragons through his close mateship with Paul McGregor, Shaun Timmins and Mark Riddell.
---
OFFICIAL Australian analysis of the World Health Organisation (WHO) report into the origins of COVID-19 has rejected outright one of its central hypotheses that the virus might have been carried on imported frozen goods and originated outside China.

The WHO's month-long investigation into the pandemic's origins this week made several key but inconclusive findings, including the virus was active outside the Wuhan markets and could have been brought in from elsewhere "in South-East Asia". China's scientists had -earlier gone one step further, suggesting it may have been on imported seafood and beef from countries -including Australia, Brazil, India and the US.
---
THE COVID FILES Government dossier claims incurable virus invented at lab with links to Australia

CHINA deliberately suppressed or destroyed evidence of the coronavirus outbreak in an "assault on international transparency" that cost tens of thousands of lives, according to a dossier prepared by concerned Western governments on the COVID-19 contagion.

The 15-page research document, obtained by The Saturday Telegraph, lays the foundation for the case of negligence being mounted against China.

It states that to the "endangerment of other countries" the Chinese government covered-up news of the virus by silencing or "disappearing" doctors who spoke out, destroying evidence of it in laboratories and refusing to provide live samples to international scientists who were working on a vaccine.

It can also be revealed the Australian government trained and funded a team of Chinese scientists who belong to a laboratory which went on to genetically modify deadly coronaviruses that could be transmitted from bats to humans and had no cure, and is not the subject of a probe into the origins of COVID-19.

As intelligence agencies investigate whether the virus inadvertently leaked from a Wuhan laboratory, the team and its research led by scientist Shi Zhengli feature in the dossier prepared by Western governments that points to several studies they conducted as areas of concern.

It cites their work discovering samples of coronavirus from a cave in the Yunnan province with striking genetic similarity to COVID-19, along with their research synthesising a bat-derived coronavirus that could not be treated.

Its major themes include the "deadly denial of human-to-human transmission", the silencing or "disappearing" of doctors and scientists who spoke out, the destruction of evidence of the virus from genomic studies laboratories, and "bleaching of wildlife market stalls", along with the refusal to provide live virus samples to international scientists working on a vaccine.

Key figures of the Wuhan Institute of Virology team, who feature in the government dossier, were either trained or employed in the CSIRO's Australian Animal Health Laboratory where they conducted foundational research on deadly pathogens in live bats, including SARS, as part of an ongoing partnership between the CSIRO and the Chinese Academy of Sciences.

This partnership continues to this day, according to the website of the Wuhan -Institute of Virology, despite concerns the research is too risky.

Politicians in the Morrison government are speaking out about the national security and biosecurity concerns of this relationship as the controversial research into bat-related viruses now comes into sharp focus amid the investigation by the Five Eyes intelligence agencies of the United States, Australia, NZ, Canada and the UK.

RISKY BAT RESEARCH In Wuhan, in China's Hubei province, not far from the now infamous Wuhan wet market, Dr Shi and her team work in high-protective gear in level-three and level-four bio-containment laboratories studying deadly bat-derived coronaviruses.

At least one of the -estimated 50 virus samples Dr Shi has in her laboratory is a 96 per cent genetic match to COVID-19. When Dr Shi heard the news about the outbreak of a new -pneumonia-like virus, she spoke about the sleepless nights she suffered worrying whether it was her lab that was responsible for the outbreak.

As she told Scientific American magazine in an article published this week: "Could they have come from our lab?" Since her initial fears, Dr Shi has satisfied herself the genetic sequence of COVID-19 did not match any her lab was studying.

Yet, given the extent of the People's Republic of China's lies, obfuscations and angry refusal to allow any investigation into the origin of the outbreak, her laboratory is now being closely looked at by international intelligence agencies.

The Australian government's position is that the virus most likely originated in the Wuhan wet market but that there is a remote possibility - a 5 per cent chance - it accidentally leaked from a laboratory.

The US's position, according to reports this week, is that it is more likely the virus leaked from a laboratory but it could also have come from a wet market that trades and slaughters wild animals, where other diseases including the H5N1 avian flu and SARS originated.

CREATING MORE DEADLY VIRUSES The Western governments' research paper confirms this.

It notes a 2013 study conducted by a team of researchers, including Dr Shi, who collected a sample of horseshoe bat faeces from a cave in Yunnan province, China, which was later found to contain a virus 96.2 per cent identical to SARS-CoV-2, the virus that caused COVID-19.

The research dossier also references work done by the team to synthesise SARS-like coronaviruses, to analyse whether they could be transmissible from bats to mammals. This means they were altering parts of the virus to test whether it was transmissible to different species.

Their November 2015 study, done in conjunction with the University of North Carolina, concluded that the SARS-like virus could jump directly from bats to humans and there was no treatment that could help.

The study acknowledges the incredible danger of the work they were conducting. "The potential to prepare for and mitigate future outbreaks must be weighed against the risk of creating more dangerous pathogens," they wrote.

You have to be a scientist to understand it, but below is the line that the governments' research paper references from the study.

"To examine the emergence potential (that is, the potential to infect humans) of circulating bat CoVs, we built a chimeric virus encoding a novel, zoonotic CoV spike protein - from the RsSHCO14-CoV sequence that was isolated from Chinese horseshoe bats - in the context of the SARS-CoV mouse-adapted backbone," the study states.

One of Dr Shi's co-authors on that paper, Professor Ralph Baric from North Carolina University, said in an interview with Science Daily at the time: "This virus is highly pathogenic and treatments developed against the original SARS virus in 2002 and the ZMapp drugs used to fight ebola fail to neutralise and control this particular virus." A few years later, in March 2019, Dr Shi and her team, including Peng Zhou, who worked in Australia for five years, published a review -titled Bat Coronaviruses in China in the medical journal Viruses, where they wrote that they "aim to predict virus hotspots and their cross-species transmission potential", describing it as a matter of "urgency to study bat corona-viruses in China to understand their potential of causing another outbreak. Their review stated: "It is highly likely that future SARS or MERS like coronavirus outbreaks will originate from bats, and there is an increased probability that this will occur in China." It examined which proteins were "important for interspecies transmission". Despite intelligence probes into whether her laboratory may have been responsible for the outbreak, Dr Shi is not hitting pause on her research, which she argues is more important than ever in preventing a pandemic. She plans to head a national project to systemically sample viruses in bat caves, with estimates that there are more than 5000 coronavirus strains "waiting to be discovered in bats globally".

"Bat-borne coronaviruses will cause more outbreaks," she told Scientific American. "We must find them before they find us."

AUSTRALIA'S INVOLVEMENT Dr Shi, the director of the Centre for Emerging Infectious Diseases at the Chinese Academy of Sciences' Wuhan Institute of Virology, spent time in Australia as a -visiting scientist for three months from February 22 to May 21, 2006, where she worked at the CSIRO's top-level Australian Animal Health Laboratory, which has recently been -renamed.

The CSIRO would not comment on what work she undertook during her time here, but an archived and translated biography on the Wuhan Institute of Virology website states that she was working with the SARS virus.

"The SARS virus antibodies and genes were tested in the State Key Laboratory of Virology in Wuhan and the Animal Health Research Laboratory in Geelong, Australia," it states.

The Telegraph has obtained two photographs of her working at the CSIRO laboratories, including in the level-four lab, in 2006.

Dr Shi's protégé, Peng Zhou - now the head of the Bat Virus Infection and Immunity Project at the Wuhan Institute of Virology - spent three years at the bio-containment facility Australian Animal Health Laboratory between 2011 and 2014. He was sent by China to complete his doctorate at the CSIRO from 2009-2010.

During this time, Dr Zhou arranged for wild-caught bats to be transported alive by air from Queensland to the lab in Victoria where they were euthanised for dissection and studied for deadly viruses.

Dr Linfa Wang, while an Honorary Professor of the Wuhan Institute of Virology between 2005 and 2011, also worked in the CSIRO Office of the Chief Executive Science Leader in Virology between 2008 and 2011.

Federal Liberal Senator Sarah Henderson said it was "very concerning" that Chinese scientists had been conducting research into bat viruses at the CSIRO in Geelong, Victoria, in jointly funded projects between the Australian and Chinese governments.

"We need to exercise extreme care with any research projects involving foreign nationals which may compromise our national security or biosecurity," she said.

While the US has cut all funding to the Wuhan Institute of Virology, the CSIRO would not respond to -questions about whether it is still collaborating with it, saying only that it collaborates with research organisations from around the world to prevent diseases.

"As with all partners, CSIRO undertakes due diligence and takes security very seriously," a spokesman said. "CSIRO undertakes all research in accordance with strict biosecurity and legislative requirements."

IS THE RESEARCH WORTH THE RISK?

The US withdrew funding from controversial experiments that make pathogens more potent or likely to spread dangerous viruses in October 2014, concerned it could lead to a global pandemic.

The pause on funding for 21 "gain of function" studies was then lifted in December 2017.

Despite the concerns, the CSIRO continued to partner and fund research with the Wuhan Institute of Virology.

The CSIRO refused to respond to questions from The Saturday Telegraph about how much money went into joint research collaboration with the Chinese Academy of Science and its Wuhan Institute of Virology.

The Wuhan Institute still lists the CSIRO as a partner while the US has cut ties since the coronavirus outbreak.

The argument is whether it is worth developing these viruses to anticipate and prevent a pandemic when a leak of the virus could also cause one. Debate in the scientific community is heated.

There have also been serious concerns about a lack of adequate safety practices at the Wuhan Institute of Virology when dealing with deadly viruses.

A "Sensitive but Unclassified" cable, dated January 19, 2018, obtained by The Washington Post, revealed that US embassy scientists and diplomats in Beijing visited the laboratory and sent warnings back to Washington about inadequate safety practices and management weaknesses as it conducted research on coronaviruses from bats.

"During interactions with scientists at the WIV laboratory, they noted the new lab has a serious shortage of -appropriately trained technicians and investigators needed to safely operate this high-containment laboratory," the cable stated.

UNLIKELY CLAIMS VIRUS CREATED IN LAB Scientific consensus is that the virus came from a wet market. But the US's top spy agency confirmed on the record for the first time yesterday that the US intelligence committee is investigating whether COVID-19 was the result of an accident at a Wuhan laboratory.

The Office of the Director of National Intelligence acting director Richard Grenell said the virus was not created in a laboratory.

"The entire Intelligence Community has been consistently providing critical support to US policymakers and those responding to the COVID-19 virus, which originated in China," he said.

"The Intelligence Community also concurs with the wide scientific consensus that the COVID-19 virus was not man-made or genetically modified. As we do in all crises, the Community's experts respond by surging resources and producing critical intelligence on issues vital to US national security. The IC will continue to rigorously examine emerging information and intelligence to determine whether the outbreak began through contact with infected animals or if it was the result of an accident at a laboratory in Wuhan." Despite Mr Grenell's statement and scientific consensus that the virus was not created in a laboratory, based on its genome sequence the governments' research paper obtained by The Telegraph notes a study that claims it was created.

South China University of Technology researchers published a study on February 6 that concluded "the killer coronavirus probably originated from a laboratory in Wuhan. Safety level may need to be reinforced in high-risk biohazards laboratories".

"The paper is soon withdrawn because it 'was not supported by direct proofs', according to author Botao Xiano," the dossier noted, continuing to point out that: '"No scientists have confirmed or refuted the paper's findings', scholar Yanzhong Huang wrote on March 5." The Saturday Telegraph does not claim that the South China University of Technology study is credible, only that it has been included in this government research paper produced as part of the case against China.

CHINA'S COVER-UP OF EARLY SAMPLES The paper obtained by The Saturday Telegraph speaks about "the suppression and destruction of evidence" and points to "virus samples ordered destroyed at genomics labs, wildlife market stalls bleached, the genome sequence not shared publicly, the Shanghai lab closure for 'rectification', academic articles subjected to prior review by the Ministry of Science and Technology and data on asymptomatic 'silent carriers' kept secret".

It paints a picture of how the Chinese government deliberately covered up the coronavirus by silencing doctors who spoke out, destroying evidence from the Wuhan laboratory and refusing to provide live virus samples to international scientists working on a vaccine.

The US, along with other countries, has repeatedly -demanded a live virus sample from the first batch of coronavirus cases. This is understood to have not been forthcoming despite its vital importance in developing a vaccine while potentially providing an indication of where the virus originated.

THE LAB WORKER WHO DISAPPEARED Out of all the doctors, activists, journalists and scientists who have reportedly disappeared after speaking out about the coronavirus or criticising the response of Chinese authorities, no case is more intriguing and worrying than that of Huang Yan Ling.

A researcher at the Wuhan Institute of Virology, the South China Morning Post reported rumours swirling on Chinese social media that she was the first to be diagnosed with the disease and was -"patient zero".

Then came her reported disappearance, with her biography and image deleted from the Wuhan Institute of Virology's website.

On February 16 the institute denied she was -patient zero and said she was alive and well, but there has been no proof of life since then, fanning speculation.

DESTRUCTION OF EVIDENCE The dossier is damning of China's constant denials about the outbreak. "Despite evidence of human-human transmission from early December, PRC authorities deny it until January 20," it states.

"The World Health Organisation does the same. Yet officials in Taiwan raised concerns as early as December 31, as did experts in Hong Kong on January 4." The paper exposes the hypocrisy of China's self--imposed travel bans while condemning those of Australia and the United States, declaring: "Millions of people leave Wuhan after the outbreak and before Beijing locks down the city on January 23." "Thousands fly overseas. Throughout February, Beijing presses the US, Italy, India, Australia, Southeast Asian neighbours and others not to protect themselves via travel restrictions, even as the PRC imposes severe restrictions at home." In the paper, the Western governments are pushing back at what they call an "assault on international transparency".

"As EU diplomats prepare a report on the pandemic, PRC successfully presses Brussels to strike language on PRC disinformation," it states.

"As Australia calls for an independent inquiry into the pandemic, PRC threatens to cut off trade with Australia. "PRC has likewise responded furiously to US calls for transparency." Chair of Australia's Joint Parliamentary Committee on Intelligence and Security Andrew Hastie said after the cover-up and disinformation campaign from China, the world needed transparency and an inquiry.

"So many Australians have been damaged by the mismanagement of COVID-19 by the Chinese government, and if we truly are as close as Beijing suggests we are then we need answers about how this all started," he said.

KEY DATES IN COVID COVER-UP November 9, 2015 Wuhan Institute of Virology publish a study revealing they created a new virus in the lab from SARS-CoV.

December 6, 2019 Five days after a man linked to Wuhan's seafood market presented pneumonia-like symptoms, his wife contracts it, suggesting human to human transmission.

December 27 China's health authorities told a novel disease, then affecting some 180 patients, was caused by a new coronavirus.

December 26-30 Evidence of new virus emerges from Wuhan patient data.

December 31 Chinese internet authorities begin censoring terms from social media such as Wuhan Unknown Pneumonia.

January 1, 2020 Eight Wuhan doctors who warned about new virus are detained and condemned. January 3 China's top health authority issues a gag order.

January 5 Wuhan Municipal Health Commission stops releasing daily updates on new cases. Continues until January 18.

January 10 PRC official Wang Guangfa says outbreak "under control" and mostly a "mild condition".

January 12 Professor Zhang Yongzhen's lab in Shanghai is closed by authorities for "rectification", one day after it shares genomic sequence data with the world for the first time.

January 14 PRC National Health Commission chief Ma Xiaowei privately warns colleagues the virus is likely to develop into a major public health event.

January 24 Officials in Beijing prevent the Wuhan Institute of Virology from sharing sample isolates with the University of Texas.

February 6 China's internet watchdog tightens controls on social media platforms. February 9 Citizen-journalist and local businessman Fang Bin disappears. April 17Wuhan belatedly raises its official fatalities by 1290.
---
Fight Beijing's bullies with Oz wine purchases

IT'S home to some of the most-recognised brand names in Australia, like Penfolds, Lehmann, Jacob's Creek and Tyrell's and is worth $6.3 billion each year.

But now it's up to everyday Aussie revellers to get behind our wine sector with thousands of local producers' livelihoods on the line thanks to a "bullying" Beijing's trade brinkmanship after what has already been a horror period for the beleaguered industry.

Aussie winemakers have battled years of drought, the 2019 Black Summer bushfires and the coronavirus pandemic only to now face Chinese tariffs of up to 200 per cent exacting a chokehold on what is our country's fifth-largest export industry.

The latest attack is a part of the ongoing Australian-Chinese trade war, with the communist nation already imposing 80 per cent tariffs on barley and banning imports from six Australian beef suppliers in the wake of the federal government's international call for an inquiry into the origins of COVID-19.

So wine industry bosses are now urging locals to show their support by celebrating with homegrown wine this festive season instead of more expensive exported products.

The call-to-arms came with Tyrrell's Wines chief executive Bruce Tyrrell slamming China for imposing the crippling new tariffs on producers and acting like "the big bully in the schoolyard".

"There is only one way to fix that and that's to stand up to it," he said. "There are a number of producers out there whose businesses are largely China-based and now their market is gone … (But) we don't need to be afraid of China.

"The current government in China is not 100 per cent secure and there is growing opposition to it.

"It's wonderful for people to support their own people and most of us are doing it naturally. This China situation will prod those who aren't already to also back local suppliers." Australian Grape and Wine chief executive Tony Battaglene said considering the Chinese tariffs, it was crucial that locals helped producers get through the supply that can now not be exported.

"It's been a pretty tough year with the bushfires and smoke and COVID," he said. "Now, with China the big concern is that it impacts about 2400 producers. We need people to try and get through this year's supply as much as possible.

"There is no doubt now that there are political motivations behind this and (China's tactics) are going across the agriculture sector. They are clearly trying to put a lot of pressure on our -producers.

"China is a $1.2 billion market and that is a lot of wine to try and move into other markets.

"We hope everyone gives a case of wine to their friends for Christmas to try and help producers." Peak body Wine Australia said such calls were particularly important given the horror run some producers were only just recovering from.

"Unfortunately, the tariffs come off the back of a year where wineries in some regions have been affected by fires and, more broadly, by the restrictions on cellar doors (imposed by COVID-19 safeguards)," a spokeswoman said.

"The best thing to do this Christmas is buy Australian and, if (people) get the opportunity, please do go out and explore the many brilliant regions and get to know some wineries first-hand." Harkham Wines owner Richard Harkham lost 80 per cent of his produce due to bushfire smoke and hopes locals will step up and support the industry in the face of China's actions.

"As a nation we've endured a lot over the past few years so it's really important that we support each other," he said.

"You have to support your family first. When we sell our wine in Australia, we make a lot more revenue than when we sell overseas due to the added costs involved. This is the time we need to rally together to get through what's happening." Iron Gate Estate director and general manager Gavin Kuo also said support from locals is what can keep -smaller wineries alive in the face of growing international competition.

"We are hoping people will help us survive and we need people to keep drinking local wine. With the bushfires and COVID and people not able to come out to wine country during last year's peak season - we were heavily impacted," he said. "Now if people drink our wine and come down and support us, it will give us a fighting chance to recuperate what we have lost in the last four to five years." Hunter Valley winemaker Geoff Krieger, of Brokenwood Wines, agreed buying local was vital right now.

"Whether it's a bottle of Hunter Valley semillon or Hunter Valley Shiraz or gifting your friends and experience to come and see us, now is the time to eat, drink and experience from your own backyard," he said.

Mudgee local Tristan Clarke said he's looking forward to travelling to wine regions across the country to help support the industry in light of borders opening.

"I'm a big wine drinker and I will 100 per cent continue to drink Australian-grown wine this summer. After the year we've had, there has never been a better time to drink local," he said.

"I plan on visiting Orange very soon and now that state borders have opened up, I'm looking into going down to Victoria's wine regions too." To help back Australian wine producers, The Daily Telegraph is offering readers the delicious. Drink Delivered Australian wines offer to help buy local and support the sector. The offer is a mixed case of all Australian wines, with most of the wines from smaller estate wineries around the country. The case of 12 mixed wines, plus two free Tyrrell's sparkling wines will cost just $139.99. Order now to get your wine by Christmas through www.ddd.wine/6000013
---
World Hoax Organization PAPER TIGER THE World Health Organisation has been slammed for failing to pass on life-saving information about COVID-19 in the early stages of the disease's spread - and its "cosy" relationship with China is to blame, critics say.

With the coronavirus pandemic continuing to kill thousands across the globe, the WHO has been more concerned with issuing a directive about the "stigma" attached to the illness.

It chastised US President Donald Trump for referring to the origins of the disease as a "Chinese virus", saying: "The stigma is more dangerous than the virus itself … stigma is the most dangerous enemy". It also warned against calling people who contract the virus "victims" or to talk about people "infecting others" or "spreading" the virus because it assigns blame.

The WHO has been called on to increase its attention on China as the nation prepares to restart its economy after its corona shutdown. But China experts in Australia warn that is unlikely to happen because of the "cosy relationship" between the world health body and the communist state.

It comes as US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo repeated his charge that Beijing had delayed sharing information on COVID-19 and "truly put thousands of lives at risk".

"My concern is that this cover-up, this disinformation that the Chinese Communist Party is engaged in, is still denying the world the information it needs so that we can prevent further cases or something like this from recurring again," he said.

Taiwan's vice president Chen Chien-jen said his nation had told the WHO that human-to-human transmission was possible in December, but its failure to pass that information on until mid January meant "an opportunity to raise the alert level both in China and the wider world was lost".

Author Clive Hamilton, whose book Silent Invasion warned of Chinese influence in Australia, urged the WHO to monitor China's claims that it was virus free and able to restart its economy.

"When the virus began the WHO, instead of listening to the medical staff on the ground, accepted the line of the Chinese Communist Party," Mr Hamilton said.

"Thousands of people have died outside China because the WHO kept repeating the misleading messages of the Chinese Communist Party. The protesting voices of the citizens were the ones telling the truth." He said at the heart of the cosy relationship was the WHO's politically correct director general, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus.Mr Ghebreyesus' home country of Ethiopia receives massive bundles of Chinese cash.
---
KAYO SPORT POWER 100 After revealing 80 of Australia's biggest sporting powerbrokers yesterday, today we continue with the heavyweights in Part II - the Top 20

20 CAMERON MUNSTER Age: 26 NRL player Source of power: A premiership followed by a State of Origin series win with Queensland has made Munster the face of rugby league. Working part-time selling club memberships when he was signed by the Storm on a zero dollar contract, Munster is now the player kids emulate in the back yard. Munster was catapulted into stardom this year with the Melbourne Storm-Maroons double act. PHELPS

19 NICK KYRGIOS Age: 25 Tennis player Source of power: Australian tennis' great enigma is polarising to the nth degree but does have public cut-through. He started the ball rolling for sports-related bushfire donations with $200 per ace and the trickle soon became a torrent. He also said what many were thinking but not brave enough to say when he lashed out at world No.1 Novak Djokovic for his blatantly reckless behaviour during privately organised tournaments where COVID protocols went out the window. Many subsequently echoed his views. His profile stretches beyond his current world ranking of 45 and the fact he has never made a Grand Slam semi-final. Many still loathe him. Some love him. Few are in the middle. But he is impossible to ignore. CRADDOCK

18 PATRICK DANGERFIELD Age: 30 Geelong AFL star andAFLPA president Source of power: As vice-captain of Geelong, Dangerfield is constantly ranked among the best five players in the comp, while juggling his duties as president of the players' union. Has a direct line to Gillon McLachlan and sits on the league's competition committee, which oversees the implementation of rules and policies. A polished media performer, the 2016 Brownlow medallist took the heat as the AFLPA twice stared down the league over pay cuts during the COVID crisis shutdown. Has the skillset to become a formidable football official or even a commissioner in retirement. WARNER

17 MATTY JOHNS Age: 49 NRL commentator Source of power: The most respected public voice in rugby league, Johns is the face of Fox Sports NRL. A fan favourite and comic genius, Johns also has one of the best minds in rugby league. Johns is a highly sought-after coach who has worked behind the scenes with stars like Cooper Cronk. Brother to Immortal Andrew, Johns now has two NRL playing sons with Jack and Cooper both debuting this year. PHELPS

16 GAI WATERHOUSE Age: 66 Racehorse trainer Source of power: Gai Waterhouse is racing's most recognisable figure. She transcends the sport and is so famous, she is widely known by her first name. She had a varied career in the media and arts until 1992 when she followed her famous father, Tommy Smith, and became a licensed racehorse trainer. Waterhouse is arguably the greatest female trainer the world has seen and has 144 Group 1 wins to her credit. Waterhouse has trained the winners of most of the nation's biggest races including a record seven Golden Slippers, seven Doncasters, seven Epsom Handicaps, Melbourne Cup and Caulfield Cup. She was elected into the Australian Racing Hall of Fame in 2007, the Australian Sporting Hall of Fame in 2018 and has been named an "Australian Living Treasure" by the National Trust of Australia. THOMAS

15 ASH BARTY Age: 24 World No.1 women's tennis player Source of power: As former Wimbledon doubles champion Todd Woodbridge said, Barty is the champion not only Australian tennis had been searching for but Australian sport as well. Cricket, swimming and the football codes and tennis itself all had image problems but Barty, the unpretentious World No.1 from Ipswich, has risen above the pack to shine as a wholesome star and a throwback to eras when that was the norm. Her influence reaches many corners of society due her Indigenous roots and the fact she overcame mental health issues, which saw her temporarily quit the sport. Tennis Australia used her to promote a campaign designed to entice girls to play sport beyond their teenage years when she said "people used to say I was too short to play". Many world No.1s retreat to tax havens but when not on the circuit she swiftly retreats to her house and dogs at Springfield. CRADDOCK

14 ANDREW ABDO Age: 43 NRL CEO Source of power: Todd Greenberg's successor, Abdo was appointed as the NRL's full-time CEO after successfully navigating rugby league through the COVID-19 crisis as the game's interim boss. South African born and raised, Abdo, 43, is a chartered accountant who worked for Deloitte in Johannesburg and Bermuda before moving to Sydney. Regarded as having one of the best commercial brains in Australian sport, Abdo has been guaranteed full operational control of the billion-dollar sport that is rugby league.

PHELPS

13 KATIE PAGE Age: 64 NRL sponsor and women's sport advocate Source of power: Head of the NRL's second biggest commercial partner, Harvey Norman CEO Page has grown to become the third-most-powerful person in rugby league. The driving force behind the NRLW, Page became the first woman to be elected onto the NRL board in 2004. There are few decisions made in league that don't have her blessing. PHELPS

12 JUSTIN LANGER Age: 50 Australian cricket coach Source of power: Australia's cricket coach, also a national selector, has had a major influence over the current side after hauling the team's cultural standards out of the sewer they tumbled in to during the Cape Town ball-tampering scandal. Passionate and intense, he likes cricketers who are similar to himself - hardworking, fit and with strong ethical values. Langer's Australia teams have generally maintained the difficult balance of maintaining a robust on-field presence without reverting to the grubbiness of the previous era. Had a rugged start but kept the faith in himself and the system, and the team and the man himself are now far more settled. CRADDOCK

11 CRAIG TILEY Age: 58 CEO, Tennis Australia Source of power: Tiley, more than anyone else, has been the driver behind transforming the Australian Open from a poor cousin of the other grand slams into Australia's biggest annual single sporting event. More than 700,000 spectators now attend each year, while the worldwide TV audience has grown to over 350 million. It delivers more than $300 million into the Australian economy and creates in excess of 4500 permanent and part-time jobs. He revitalised the tournament through listening closely to what the players want, so counts Roger Federer, Serena Williams, Rafael Nadal and Novak Djokovic as his buddies. A strong advocate for gender equity, the Australian Open was the second tournament to offer equal prize money. Tiley has rebranded it as Asia's grand slam - allowing Tennis Australia to develop a bigger footprint in the world's most populated region - and convince the government to invest $900m in redeveloping Melbourne Park into the best tennis facility in the world.LINDEN CONTINUED PAGES 68-69

10 JAMES WARBURTON Age: 50 Seven West Media chief executive Source of power: The man in charge of the free-to-air broadcast rights for AFL and international cricket flexed his muscle over winter by negotiating heavily reduced deals with both codes. While an overwhelming majority of AFL fans say they want a traditional 2.30pm Grand Final - after this year's COVID-enforced experiment at the Gabba - Warburton and co will have the biggest say on whether the thirst for ratings wins out and the AFL permanently shifts to a twilight or night-time decider. The network has publicly savaged Cricket Australia over its Test, one-day and Big Bash scheduling and the success of this summer could have dramatic ramifications on the future of Australia's national sport. The early departure of Indian superstar Virat Kohli won't help. WARNER

9 WAYNE BENNETT Age: 70 NRL coach Source of power: Written off as a past-his-prime geriatric after a COVID-19 breach where he claimed to have been confused by the NRL's quarantine rules, Bennett confirmed himself as a coaching genius when he masterminded the biggest shock in State of Origin history. Queensland's giant-killing 2020 series win over NSW is the latest triumph in a career that has produced seven premiership crowns with two separate clubs. The 70-year-old has huge influence across rugby league, with his advice sought for major decisions in the game. PHELPS

8 PATRICK DELANY Foxtel chief executive Source of power: During a seven-year stint as boss of Fox Sports, which ended in 2018 when he became CEO of the Foxtel Group, Delany was the driving force behind the reshaping of Australia's sports broadcast landscape, a key figure behind every major sports deal over the past 10 years. He oversaw the introduction of Fox Footy and Fox League and helped create the Big Bash League in partnership with Cricket Australia in 2011. Delany changed the look of Fox Sports, endorsed magazine shows that humanised and broadened interest in codes, and helped to bring almost every major sport in Australia to Fox despite plenty of spirited rights negotiations that were never as routine as they sounded. A lively public speaker, he encouraged his commentators to have a crack, once saying at a season launch: "If I am going to put a microphone in front of you, I want you to say something." More recently he was the key architect of the Kayo streaming service, a digital disruption of Foxtel that now has huge popular traction with a new generation of sports fans that never had Foxtel. CRADDOCK

7 MICHAEL MILLER Age: 51 News Corp Australia executive chairman Source of power: Raised in the Hunter Valley, Miller's first love of media started as a boy reading sports results in The Muswellbrook Chronicle. Decades later he is the man with a big say in Australia over News Corp's digital, publishing and broadcast sporting empire. His influence stretches to all corners of the sporting spectrum - from being a shadow across the negotiating table when Fox Sports won the cricket rights in 2018, to one-on-one discussions with Wayne Bennett in his tumultuous final days as Broncos coach, to reassuring country readers that a switch from paper to digital publication would enhance rather than tarnish their local sport coverage. Renowned for his measured demeanour, Miller's role at News Corp is much broader than sport but sport remains a key part of it and no major decision is made without passing his desk. He has sat on boards ranging from realestate.com.au to Waratahs Rugby.

CRADDOCK

6 DUSTIN MARTIN Age: 29 Richmond AFL star Source of power: The biggest name in Australian domestic sport and the closest thing we've had to English soccer legend David Beckham, minus the pop star wife. Kids want to play like him, grown drunk men adopt his haircut, sponsors clamour to sign him and every rival club wishes he wore their jumper. Not many footballers of any code get to sip cocktails in the Maldives with Serena Williams or to leave their car in the MCG basement carpark for weeks after yet another premiership salute. Three flags and three Norm Smith Medals stamp him as arguably the greatest AFL finals player in history and at 29 there's plenty of top-end footy left in Dusty. Turns heads in the NRL states and helped Richmond break a 37-year run of misery to become the biggest sporting club in the land with more than 100,000 members. WARNER

5 SAM KERR Age: 27 Australian women's soccer captain.

With admirers stretching from Serena Williams down to young fans - including boys - seen wearing her jersey, the Matildas captain's rise has embodied the spectacular surge of women's sport in Australia. With her incredible skillset and multicultural background, she represents many parts of Australia and has taken women's soccer to a level of popularity that was unthinkable even a decade ago. Her backflip goalscoring celebrations have both showcased her star quality and freakish athleticism which last year saw her voted one of the best female soccer players in the world. She has just signed a deal to do six children's books claiming she wanted to inspire Australian kids to chase their dreams. CRADDOCK

4 GILLON MCLACHLAN Age: 47 AFL chief executive Source of power: Polo playing, racehorse-owning boss of Australia's biggest domestic sport - the code that draws the largest crowds and pockets the richest broadcast deals. Navigated the game through the COVID crisis, a task made harder by the emergency exodus of 10 teams from the Victorian heartland and the added complication of negotiating border control rules with six different states. As the biggest code with the most to lose, McLachlan oversaw the league's response to the financial crisis, reducing what loomed as a potential $1b hit into an estimated $100m loss, notwithstanding savage cost and job cuts. Struck a deal with the Queensland government on the eve of a state election that saved the season. The arrival of Peter V'landys has been a game changer in the code wars and his rugby league counterpart read the play better, boldly restarting his competition two weeks earlier and locking away an extended pay-TV deal with Foxtel. Entering his seventh season in the hot seat, McLachlan's remains the most visible figure in Australian rules.

WARNER

3 TIM PAINE Age: 35 Australian Test cricket captain.

Source of power: The most unexpected saviour in Australian sporting history. Became Australian captain midway through the ball-tampering Test in Cape Town and his sturdy temperament guided his ship through this nation's greatest cricket controversy. When Australian cricket was wobbling on its moral axis two summers ago in a losing series against India he was the lone cool head among team bosses. His rousing yet composed dressing-room speech to an Australian team that lost a Test due to a Ben Stokes 'miracle' at Headingley last year was one of the finest by an Australian captain and his team duly rebounded to retain the Ashes. Australia owes him much. Selectors had traditionally thought keepers should not be made captains due to their high work level but they had little choice when appointing Paine and he has handled the two roles exceptionally well. CRADDOCK

2 JOHN COATES Age: 70 Australian Olympic Committee president and International Olympic Committee vice-president Source of power: No Australian wields as much influence on global sport as Coates. As the second-highest ranking official in the Olympic movement, Coates has the power to persuade sport's most powerful executives and captains of industry, as well as major political leaders and even members of royal families. A lawyer by profession, Coates is also the president of the Court of Arbitration for Sport and has a knack for getting his wishes. It was Coates who made the inspired decision to pick Cathy Freeman to light the cauldron at the 2000 Sydney Olympics. He's a mover and shaker on a stack of high-powered committees, including the bid team to bring the Rugby World Cup back to Australia in 2027. But his biggest goal right now is to ensure Brisbane wins the hosting rights for the 2032 Olympics and Paralympics. If the world's biggest multi-sports event comes back, you can bet it'll all be down to the power of Coates. LINDEN CONTINUED PAGE 67 - See article "1 THE SAVIOUR OF SPORT IN 2020" for article on 1. Peter V'landys
---
Meet the student taking on top Oz uni for its links to the CCP WHEN he's not a "fire-breathing -activist" taking on the insidious influence of China's Communist Party in Australia, Drew Pavlou loves his two dachshunds Max and Luna, reading Shakespeare and chilling with his mates.

Becoming one of the world's best-known student activists overnight after he took on one of Australia's leading universities for its links to the Asian superpower, he said people often expected him to be serious like Greta Thunberg.

"I'm a human rights campaigner but I have never been a serious person. I love humour and satire," the 20-year-old University of Queensland student said yesterday.

He said he fully expects the uni to expel him this week but believes it would be the best news because he wants to take the 110-year-old institution on in the Queensland Supreme Court … and win.

Mr Pavlou and his top-flight barrister Tony Morris QC, who is representing him pro bono, walked out of a disciplinary hearing last week, where he faced 11 allegations of misconduct listed in a 186-page -document.

"It's the vibe. It's justice. It's Mabo, it's the vibe," Mr Pavlou said outside the hearing, channelling Dennis Denuto in the movie The Castle.

He shot to international fame last year when he was among a group -attacked by Chinese nationalists while protesting in support of Hong Kong's pro-democracy movement. Mr Pavlou's activism was condemned by the consulate-general of China in Brisbane, Dr Xu Jie, an adjunct professor to the university.

For the student of philosophy, history and English literature, it was also his satire and stunts that got him into trouble as he aimed them at Beijing. The complaints against him include posing outside vice-chancellor Peter Hoj's office wearing a Hazmat suit. Professor Hoj has been a consultant to Beijing's global Confucius Institute, of which there are hundreds around the world and 13 at Australian universities.

He also promoted a fake Confucius Institute panel discussion about "why Uighurs must be exterminated", a pointed attack on the persecution of the ethnic minority in China.

He said yesterday that he had a lot of support from students from around Australia, including those at the University of Sydney, who are also worried about the lack of human rights in China.

A Chinese human rights magazine called him "the most famous undergraduate student in the world" and he has featured in The Washington Post. Mr Pavlou said he always wanted to be an activist but expected to wait until he had graduated.

Now he has shelved plans to be an academic and may give politics a go - as an independent.

"I'm often portrayed as a troublemaker, someone who is hard, but I like having a laugh. I'm a young bloke," Mr Pavlou, the oldest of three kids in a Greek-Cypriot family, said.

"In person I'm a little bit more quiet. I'm a bit of a softy and my dogs are the loves of my life. But then I get pumped and I get into fire-breathing mode. I do like causing trouble." A member of the university senate representing 35,000 of the students, Mr Pavlou is not racist and has a lot of great Chinese friends and supporters. However, he said China's recent trade threats against Australia for calling for an independent inquiry into the origins of COVID-19 just confirm the nation is a thug and a bully.

As a literature student he loves Richard Flanagan and refugee writer Behrouz Boochani but his favourite is Shakespeare, because of the Bard's ability to force readers into empathy for characters they may otherwise dismiss, such as Shylock in the Merchant of Venice who is more complex than he first appears.

"I'm a great believer in the power of literature to transform lives and let us see the humanity in others." The fight however has taken its toll with countless death threats made through his Facebook page from mainland China and even Chinese students in Australia. They have been reported to police. "It's been really intense and I am a bit tired at the moment but I don't regret any of it whatsoever," he said.
---
NRL COACHES KNOW THE AXE CAN SWIFTLY FALL BUT ONCE SHOWN THE DOOR, THE NEXT ONE THAT OPENS MIGHT WELL BE THE DOOR TO THE 'REAL' WORLD, WRITES DAVID RICCIO FORMER Gold Coast coach Garth Brennan spent more than 20 years selling the game of rugby league.

Now he's in Newcastle, selling houses.

Just over 12 months after being sacked by the Titans, Brennan has resurfaced as a real estate agent.

"I love the game and if the right job came along be it in junior development or the lower grades again, I'd love it," Brennan said.

"But I've got bills to pay, a young family to provide for, so I can't wait around.

"Property investment and real estate has always been a big passion of mine, so I'm having a big crack at it." Mark Murray, the former Queensland State of Origin, Roosters and Melbourne coach, is also in the property game, selling $1 million waterfront houses in Brisbane.

Famous for falling agonisingly short of winning the 2001 premiership with Parramatta, Brian Smith is a coach no more. Lately, he has been working on winning ratings as an Uber driver.

Arthur Kitinas is still running the Marrickville tyre shop he's manned since he left Souths in 2004 and remember Brian 'Bluey' McLennan, the Warriors coach from 2012?

He's also working with cars, repairing transmissions, outside of Auckland. Phil Economidis, the 67-year-old former coach of the 1997 Gold Coast Chargers, continues to coach in Belgrade, while former Manly coach Geoff Toovey catches the bus to the city each day for his job as a chartered accountant.

Welcome to the afterlife for an NRL coach - a place where our favourite mentors and master -tacticians learn to start again.

Cold, callous and cut-throat, the pressure on coaches from fans and football club boards has resulted already this season in Dean Pay (Canterbury), Stephen Kearney (Warriors), Paul Green (North Queensland) and Paul McGregor (St George Illawarra) leaving their clubs.

If the Broncos part ways with the heavily-scrutinised Anthony Seibold, it will be the most coaches let go during a season in 22 years.

So what becomes of our once-revered leaders?

Where do they go, what do they do and how do they feel when they read about another one of their brethren being shown the door?

Despite his brief stint in the top job at the Titans, where he won 12 of 40 games, Brennan while shattered to have his career crushed, didn't waste time wallowing in his sudden exit.

He dusted himself off and secured work at the NRL earlier this year, reviewing the performance of referees, before he fell victim of the COVID-19 crisis that led to job cuts at League Central.

The 48-year-old has since returned to his home of Newcastle where he's a budding real estate agent and property investor.

"I enjoyed that," Brennan said of his role with the NRL. "My priority wasn't to get back into it (NRL coaching). It was to get my family back home and life settled.

"I always like a challenge, so I said 'what's next' and real estate is a really good challenge.

"It's (real estate) always been something I've been passionate about. I've always been into investment properties and it's a -challenge I'm enjoying.

"They're a young and enthusiastic firm (Creative Property Co) and I'm learning the ropes with them. I'm seeing all these coaches getting sacked and so I'm grateful at the moment." The loneliness and uncertainty that coaches feel after being axed is why former Raiders, Cowboys and Titans coach Neil Henry is passionate about setting-up rugby league's first-ever coaches association, both to provide support and a collective voice for the game's leading mentors.

Kitinas was smart enough to realise that NRL coaching doesn't last forever. He had his tyre shop to fall back on when he left the Rabbitohs while another coach, former Cronulla mentor Stuart Raper made the timely decision to buy a formal wear business only a few weeks -before his sacking from the Sharks in 2006.

"Most coaches are ex-players, who have only ever been in rugby league, so they really don't have anything to fall back on when that time comes," Raper said.

"Others make a bit of money out of their careers, while there's others like me, who wasn't at that great height for a long time, so to have the formal hire business was very fortunate. With that going, I was able to do some work with Fox Sports, the Men of League and now the NSWRL (referee high performance manager) for the past three years, so I'm one of the lucky ones who has been able to stay involved with the game." Both Kitinas and Raper agreed that with their exit from elite level coaching unfolding more than 15 years ago, the pressure on results today, had gone to a new level.

"It's the nature of the beast. You're hired to be fired," Raper said. "As (former coach) Warren Ryan would say, 'Coaches should rent, not buy'.

"It's hard to have longevity in the game, you have to be exceptionally good. You've got to have a good squad, you have to have a good organisation.

"A prime example of that is the Roosters, from top to bottom, they recruit well and support their coaches by putting support around them." On the phone from his Marrickville work shop, Kitinas added: "You feel for them (sacked coaches), for different reasons.

"The thing is with all of them is that sometimes there's things that are out of their control that lead to that failure.

"Recruitment can make or break a coach and influences around the club can make it very difficult to do your job. "So just because they're sacked, doesn't mean they're necessarily a bad coach."
---
It was Chinese philosopher Confucius who said before you embark on a journey of revenge, dig two graves. The Chinese Communist government would be familiar with the musings of Confucius but they certainly didn't have that little gem of wisdom in mind when they declared war on our barley and meat industries.

All because we had the temerity to ask for an inquiry into the origins of the coronavirus. If it wasn't so serious it would be comical. The bully beating up on the little kid because he can.

But guess what? That bully in the playground has a willing mate. The Victorian government and our university sector have put the almighty dollar before our national interest.

As such, we're actually not all in this together. Australia's most left-wing government, Victoria, and the university sector, a hotbed for Marxism, are cosying up to the Chinese Communist Party at a time when most Australians are aghast at Beijing's bullying tactics.

As China comes down hard on our barley and beef producers, the Victorian government continues its belt and road folly with the Chinese. This policy allows the Communist country to get a major foothold into Victoria through infrastructure projects.

Meanwhile, at the University of Queensland, they continue to go after a student who organised anti-China and pro-Hong Kong rallies.

Let's not forget that Australia's tertiary education system is heavily reliant on Chinese students.

In Victoria, we've had the unedifying comments of its treasurer Tim Pallas, saying the federal government had "vilified" China by leading the call for an independent inquiry into the origins of COVID-19. Seriously, Pallas should resign. It's that simple. If Pallas thinks we've vilified the Chinese by trying to keep them accountable he doesn't deserve to be in public office.

As for UQ student Drew Pavlou, he and his legal eagle Tony Morris walked out of a disciplinary hearing because they say UQ was not complying with its own charter by refusing to hand over documents required for Pavlou's defence - a claim UQ strongly denies.

Those documents allegedly related to the university's vice-chancellor liaising with the Chinese consulate on how they should manage the public relations response to the Pavlou matter.

That imbroglio is now headed for a likely hearing in the Supreme Court. For Victoria and the universities, the pursuit of the almighty dollar has affected their judgment. Australia has 14 Confucius Institutes and there's one in the NSW Department of Education. Nowhere is the increasing level of interdependence between China and Australia more evident than in the academic landscape. As China flexes its economic muscle, bullying Australia with its rhetoric and actions, the pandering of Victoria and the universities to Beijing is not a good look.
---
Government shutdown threat for future NRL breaches DEPUTY Premier John -Barilaro has warned that the NSW Government could shutdown the NRL season if players again breach COVID-19 guidelines, saying: "This is the warning shot." A crucial figure in rugby league's push to restart on May 28, Barilaro has told The Daily Telegraph he supports the decision to fine, rather than suspend, NRL stars Latrell Mitchell, Nathan Cleary and Josh Addo-Carr for serious public health breaches.

CONTINUED PAGE 78 FROM BACK PAGE Despite calls from several commentators, including Phil Gould, to ban all three players for the season, they will now be free to play after paying a combined $44,000.

Yesterday, the NRL fined Mitchell and Addo-Carr $50,000 each (60 per cent of which is suspended) for their northern NSW camping trip.

Penrith No.7 Nathan Cleary was also slugged $10,000 (60 per cent suspended) after images emerged of him socialising at home on Anzac Day with at least five young women.

While each player also received a one-match ban, that too has been suspended until the end of the season.

A fourth player, Newcastle's Tyronne Roberts-Davis, received the same sanctions as Cleary after attending the same camping trip as Mitchell and Addo-Carr.

Barilaro described the sanctions as "fair" but warned that further indiscretions could mean the code is shut down immediately.

"This is the warning shot," said Barilaro, who has played a major role in several negotiations, including getting the -Warriors into Australia by May 4.

"When the game gets going again, no player can breach the rules. Once the NRL competition is up and running, players must understand their actions could have broader ramifications for the entire game.

"We understand no player has ever been bigger than rugby league. Which is why it's important in this situation we deal with individuals and don't punish the game.

"Or not yet. But if this happens again when the season is back under way, if there are more and more breaches, the NRL will be held accountable by both the public and the NSW Government." Asked if the sanctioned trio, who all represented NSW in Origin last year, had put the code's hyped season restart in doubt, Barilaro said: "I don't think it has sabotaged what we are trying to do.

"But it isn't helpful. We have convinced a lot of people to get this season under way again, but not everyone. I'm arguing (to government) that the NRL is putting measures in place to deal with all the restrictions around COVID-19, then before we even get going a couple of players breach those rules.

"People are working tirelessly to get rugby league going again and these -players jeopardise that." NSW Police are also investigating Cleary over possible breaches of social distancing after images of the Panthers halfback emerged with girls, said to be friends of his sister. It is alleged the group stayed only briefly at a home the 22-year-old shares with fellow Panther Tyrone May.

Asked about the fines, ARLC chairman Peter V'landys suggested the players had put "the game and the community at risk"."It's certainly hard to accept such behaviour when the game is doing everything it can to persuade the community that its players are responsible and behave appropriately," he said.
---
THE COVID FILES EXCLUSIVE Chinese scientists linked to virus probe studied in Australia

TWO Chinese scientists - who Western intelligence agencies are looking into as part of their probe into the origins of the global coronavirus contagion - studied live bats in Australia in research jointly funded by the Australian and Chinese governments. An investigation by The Daily Telegraph can reveal the Five Eyes intelligence agencies of Australia, Canada, NZ, UK and US, are understood to be looking closely at the work of a senior scientist at the Wuhan Institute of Virology, Peng Zhou, and fellow scientist Shi Zhengli, as they examine whether COVID-19 originated from a wet market or whether the naturally-occurring virus may have been inadvertently released from a level four laboratory in Wuhan.FULL REPORT PAGES 2-3


---
THE NRL 'RATBAG' FROM ROCKHAMPTON NOW HAS A BUSINESS EMPIRE IT'S a rags-to-riches tale of a "rat bag" teenager from Rockhampton who has morphed into a business-savvy millionaire at the Melbourne Storm.

Welcome Cameron Munster Inc.

Four years ago, Munster's rugby league career was at the crossroads, the Storm ace kicked out of Australia's World Cup squad by Mal Meninga following an alcohol-fuelled pub spat that sent to Melbourne for crisis talks with Craig Bellamy.

The Storm super coach laid it on the line. In typical Bellamy style, no punches were pulled. He told Munster to wake up and get off the booze … or get out of the Melbourne Storm.

Fast forward to March, 2021 and Munster has become a juggernaut - on and off the field.

He is the king of Queensland rugby league after winning the Wally Lewis Medal for his matchwinning magic in piloting the Maroons to an epic boilover of the Blues in last year's Origin series triumph.

Munster's on-field transformation has triggered an off-field revolution that had him branch out into property investment and business ventures, rubbing shoulders with Queensland's most powerful people.

He has a direct line to Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk, who was impressed with Munster after a chance meeting at a restaurant last year Over the past 12 months, Munster has realised he needs to get serious about planning for life after football.

The COVID-19 crisis last year, which put the NRL premiership on ice for three months, forced every well-paid player to face their mortality in the sport.

Munster, on $900,000 this season, isn't about to go broke anytime soon. But he will if he doesn't use his money wisely.

"I started studying a Certificate IV in Business last year when COVID hit," Munster said.

"As an NRL player, you aren't in this game for long. I've had to learn the hard way. As a teenager at the Storm, I thought this is going to last forever. I was always the youngest bloke in the team and suddenly I'm almost the oldest guy (26) in the team.

"I'm getting to my 30s. I've nearly been at Melbourne for 10 years. "In the last year or so, I've watched a few of my teammates at the Storm who have developed their own business ideas and I thought I've reached a stage of my career where I have to start thinking of a life beyond football.

"If I can set a platform for myself now, I can find some stability for myself when I retire from footy." His manager Shaun Pyne added, succinctly: "The ratbag has turned himself into a businessman." The first step for Munster was purchasing his first home in Melbourne, which piqued his interest in other commercial opportunities.

Suddenly, Munster is whipping himself up into a corporate tsunami. He has sponsorship deals with Puma and Musashi and is about to release a product range from shirts and caps to alcoholic ginger beer.

Working with Terella Brewing, he has an ownership stake in a ginger-infused brew coined Mad Dog, a tribute to his nickname at the Storm.

There is an alcohol-free version for kids called Drop Kick, which will be released in school tuck shops across Australia, and he has signed on as an ambassador for a number of charities in the mental-health space.

"I am excited about launching some of these products," he said. "I'm interested in business and investment. Making that first investment to get my home made me think about other ventures I could be involved in." Working with Ringers Western, Munster has also devised his own casual clothing range.

"I wouldn't call myself book smart but I believe I network well with people," Munster said. "By nature, I love having a yarn with people and having a joke. "I don't consider myself to be -better than anyone."
---
Three ways to restart comp

THE NRL's football innovation committee is weighing up three core season structures for the resumption of play, including one option that could mean the players are faced with the prospect of spending four months or more cut off from family and friends.

The Daily Telegraph understands the committee - codenamed Project Apollo - will take into account the costs and biosecurity demands of each option before rendering its verdict, most likely within weeks.

Crucially, it will also need the government to sanction the game's return. Provided that happens, the season is likely to take one of three forms.

The first option would involve kicking off the game's return with men's and women's State of Origin, before playing 23 rounds of the premiership - two rounds were played before the season was put on hold - plus finals and a grand final in December.

The second option would begin with the return of premiership matches before Origin is played at the back end of the year.

The final option would be to start as soon as possible and mix Origin into the premiership.

The NRL recently spoke about focusing on a 20-week competition in which each team would play the other once. However, it appears it hasn't ruled out a full season of premiership matches leading into the finals and a grand final close to Christmas.

That could require a significant sacrifice from a playing group that has already given up large chunks of money to ensure the game can survive.

The players have agreed to mammoth pay cuts while the game is on hold because of COVID-19, the relatively seamless negotiations over cuts in stark contrast to some other sports around the world, most notably the -English Premier League.

Premier League players are yet to agree to any pay cuts, which has left them wide open to criticism. The next challenge facing the NRL will be to convince the players to agree to isolation measures designed to prevent them contracting coronavirus when the competition resumes.

The NRL is considering placing teams in up to four -bubbles across the ACT, NSW and Queensland, where they would be kept at arm's length from the public as well as family.

Queensland remains the most -attractive option given the rate of -infection continues to dramatically slow. Yesterday, Queensland reported only nine new cases of COVID-19. NSW had 87 cases - the state's lowest daily count since March 21.

A full season could mean the players will be forced to confront the prospect of an extended time, most likely several months, away from their families and the wider community.

NRL'S GAME PLANS FOR 2020 SEASON * OPTION 1 - Season starts with four State of Origin games (men's and women's), followed by 23 rounds of the premiership, finals, grand final * OPTION 2 - Season starts with premiership games followed by finals and grand final. State of Origin at end of year* OPTION 3 - Season starts ASAP with premiership and State of Origin mixed together, followed by finals and grand final
---
NSW Deputy Premier John Barilaro says the NRL must suspend any player who breaches the COVID-19 health guidelines between now and May 28, warning: "If it happens in the season, the competition will get shut down." A key player in the Project Apollo relaunch, Barilaro has revealed the NSW government will recommend to ARLC chairman Peter -V'landys that he suspend any player who breaches distancing protocols during their -second 'pre-season'.

The Deputy Premier also said he would suspend Penrith No.7 Nathan Cleary for the rest of the season after having twice fronted the NRL -Integrity Unit this week.

While Cleary was not fined by NSW Police for having a group of women inside his home, Barilaro said the fact the NSW Origin star failed to initially disclose several social media videos that were eventually aired represented "broken trust".

It is understood the NRL could announce further -sanctions against Cleary today."If the NRL competition gets signed off, the cost of any (social distancing) breach after May 28 will be significant," Barilaro told The Daily Telegraph. "And I'm not talking financial cost. If a player breaches guidelines once the competition starts, it will get shut down. It's that simple."
---
IT IS the phone call that everyone dreads - and it can now be revealed that more than 24,000 people across the State have received one.

For the first time since NSW Health contact tracing teams began the painstaking job of tracking down people who may have been infected, the State government has released details on just how many people have told they may have the virus. Since the first case of COVID-19 was confirmed in Australia in late January, the Public Health Emergency Opeartions Centre has overseen around 120 daily phone calls with those contacted told to self-isolate and watch for symptoms.

The calls have been "close contacts" associated with 3653 positive cases. A close contact is someone that has been face-to-face with another person for 15 minutes or being in the same room such as a restaurant for two or more hours, others regarded as a "casual contact".

Contact tracing team director Carolyn Murray said there were around 300 people now tracking close contacts compared with "four to six" in March. Staff were given a list of people to call and script to use in passing on the necessary information, she said.

"The quicker we can get someone diagnosed and then the list of people they've been in contact with, the quicker we can get people to self-isolate," Ms Murray said.

"We would hope, if we find out about people in the morning that are a close contact, that we would have contacted them by the end of the day.

"Some people will have more than 50 contacts, or 100 contacts, and everyone of those individuals is called by us. That's a lot of calls to make. Every day feels like a week." As well as staff from NSW Health, others making the calls include Australian Defence Force personnel, Qantas workers and Taronga Zoo employees.

The figures are in addition to 1.8 million COVID-19 tests that have been carried out across 280 testing sites, including 40 drive-through clinics and 17 pop-up sites with NSW Health Pathology supported by both private clinics and GPs across the State.

While contact tracing was a critical component of the response, Chief Health Officer Dr Kerry Chant thanked people who themselves had voluntarily come forward for testing - a move that remained crucial. "Right now we need to stamp out any undetected infections which may be lurking in the community," she said.

Health Minister Brad Hazzard praised staff fighting one of biggest health crises the State had ever faced.

"The extensive work undertaken to protect the community over the past eight months has been nothing short of awe-inspiring," he said.

Hospitals and clinicians are working to quadruple ICU capacity from 500 to 2,000, with capacity now at over 1900.

More than 800 new ventilators have also been delivered. Since January, the NSW Health Pathology team has been working to sequence genomes to examine the origin.
---
BRYCE Cartwright sometimes worries about how much longer he can soldier on, fighting the good fight with the pain barrier.

The Titans forward knows he has his critics. He jokes he is convenient "click bait". If he's not getting bagged about his defensive efforts on the field, he is getting hammered off it about his refusal to follow the NRL's COVID-19 guidelines on flu shots and his family's stance on anti-vaccination.

But behind the brickbats, few see Cartwright's courage just to remain in the NRL. He is 25 but he has the knees of a 50-year-old. He is bone-on-bone in both knees, the shock absorption of his cartilage long scraped away by surgeons. At 19, he broke his ankle so badly in his debut NRL season in 2014 a doctor told him his NRL career was over.

Six years on, Cartwright, his gait pigeon-toed, has defied medical wisdom. On Friday night, he played his 112th top-grade game, helping the Titans to a gutsy 16-12 defeat of the Warriors, but there are days where he ponders his mortality in such a brutal sport.

"I do worry about how much longer I can keep going," he said. "I had a meniscus tear when I was 15 and the surgeon scraped out all the cartilage. Then two years ago, I did the meniscus in my other knee. Since then, it's been bone-on-bone.

"The critics don't see what you go through. Two weeks ago, I had to get my knees drained. I had 100ml of fluid taken out. My knees swell up and I have to get it drained all the time. That's the price some players pay in this game. We get paid good money, but it's not an easy ride.

"It's hard mentally on me at times. But I always believe in never giving up. I will battle as long as I can until I retire." Two years after breaking his ankle, Cartwright was so dominant for his former club Penrith he was touted as a NSW Origin superstar. He was swatting away defenders, chip-kicking and ball-playing with such confidence he resembled a forward version of former Eels wizard Jarryd Hayne. That 2016 season gives Cartwright hope his ankle won't stop him recapturing his match-winning mojo for the Titans.

"Initially the doc didn't want to tell me the truth because he didn't want to put me off, but when I came back to playing, he said my ankle was like something out of a car crash," Cartwright said. "My injury was so bad it was shown in a study over in the United States in colleges and universities.

"The doc didn't think I would run properly again. I have worked my ass to get back to this level. I lost a shitload of speed and strength. For seven months, I didn't take a day off with rehab, I worked every day to fix my ankle.

"All the training and strength work we do at the Titans is amazing, I wouldn't be on the field without the professional help I get from our trainers.

"What keeps me going is the feeling I haven't reached my best. I want to repay the Titans for giving me a chance after I left Penrith." Cartwright was embroiled in a different health saga in May when he refused to follow the NRL's edict for flu shots for all players under the code's strict COVID plan to restart the competition. Temporarily banned from training, Cartwright was ultimately cleared to return after being granted a medical exemption. He was slammed for jeopardising the entire NRL competition.

"I'm used to being in the headlines, I seem to be click bait for whatever reason," he said with a laugh, speaking for the first time about the issue. "It was just a personal decision. I have my own ways of looking after my body and I didn't feel having a flu shot was relevant to what needed to happen.

"I didn't feel I should be forced to do it. In the past, I've had a bad reaction to the flu shot. I won't go into exactly what it did to me, but I got a medical certificate to explain the reaction I had and I am happy the NRL accepted it and let me play.

"We have to fill in an application every day. If we have a runny nose or a headache, you have to go and get a coronavirus test. The NRL players are well protected so if you have the slightest problem, the clubs are across it. I feel fine and everyone is well protected." Cartwright's reluctance to have the flu shot seemingly goes hand-in-glove with his family's stance on injections.

His partner Shanelle has spoken out on social media about their decision not to vaccinate their two young children.

At the height of Cartwright's anti-injection stance, Shanelle was ambushed by paparazzi while grocery shopping with their kids.

"It was disgusting what they did to Shanelle," he says.

"It was pretty low. It's quite sad, it's effectively stalking. "I'm not against people who choose to vaccinate, but it's not for me or Shanelle. It's our decision. Our kids aren't vaccinated. They are healthy, we look after them and they are healthy and happy kids so we're comfortable with our decision." He is off-contract next year, but wants to sign a new deal and finish his career with the Titans. "I love the place," he said.
---
THE COVID FILES TOP MILITARY SCIENTIST HAS TIES WITH CSIRO

A SCIENTIST employed by China's People's Liberation Army, who has been genetically modifying coronaviruses and studying transmission from animals to humans, has had a longstanding professional relationship with the director of Australia's top bio-containment facility.

The Daily Telegraph can reveal the director of Australia's Animal Health Laboratory Dr Trevor Drew had a working relationship for at least seven years with a senior scientist employed by the PLA's Academy of Military Medical Sciences, Dr Tu Changchun.

The Daily Telegraph has obtained photographs of Dr Drew's visits to meet with Dr Tu in 2009 and 2016. One photo shows him smiling and holding Dr Tu up in the air during this trip.

Their relationship was forged through the Jilin University, where Dr Drew was a visiting professor of virology from 2009 to 2014 and, maintaining a relationship, visited again in 2016 while on a trip to China to lead "projects to improve China's capacity for the prevention, detection and control of rabies and Swine Fever." Jilin University, in the city of Changchun in China's northeast province, has -secret-level security credentials, "allowing it to participate in research and production for classified weapons and defence technology projects", according to Australian security analysts who have classified it "very high risk" for its high level of defence research.

The revelation comes amid calls from members of the Morrison Government for a federal oversight body to ensure there is no foreign -interference in the research sector, and to give checks and balances to foreign partnerships.

As well as being a -researcher at the Institute of Military Veterinary Medicine of the Chinese PLA's Academy of Military Medical Sciences, Tu Changchun is also a professor at Jilin University, according to both his biography and a now-deleted press-release on the university's website.

GENETIC ENGINEERING In his biography, his research direction is listed as "virus disease" and a description of his scientific research projects centres on genetic engineering of viruses.

At Dr Tu's page at the Jilin University website, it speaks about his work genetically modifying coronaviruses and other infectious diseases to see if they are transmissible to humans.

"Research on the source of SARS coronavirus transmission: by means of gene amplification, serological detection and virus isolation, the detection, isolation and identification of coronavirus in wild animals and domestic animals and poultry, so as to find the animal origin of SARS virus and study the virus the origin," an excerpt from his page at Jilin University states.

"Then, through animal -inoculation tests, SARS virus susceptible animals are screened to study the animal-human transmission route." Along with many other Chinese researchers in this field, Tu Changchun's research affiliated with the Academy of Military Medical Sciences often involves finding new diseases that come from animals.

MILITARY RESEARCH The Academy of Military Sciences is the highest-level research institute of the -People's Liberation Army, -according to PLA Daily.

The Australian Strategic Policy Institute's China's defence university tracker states that Jilin University works closely with China's nuclear weapons complex and hosts at least two defence research labs.

They are located in its College of Computer Science and Technology and in the College of Chemistry. "Its Key Laboratory of Attack and Defence Simulation Technology for Naval Warfare, Ministry of Education is involved in -cybersecurity research for the Navy," the ASPI project states. "The lab's academic committee is headed by a computer scientist from China Aerospace Science and Technology Corporation, a leading state-owned missile manufacturer." Dr Tu is also listed on the Wuhan Institute of Virology's website as sitting on the scientific advisory committee of its Centre for Emerging -Infectious Diseases - the -institute at the centre of the global probe into the origins of the coronavirus.

The Daily Telegraph has previously revealed that two scientists from the Wuhan -Institute of Virology, Shi Zhengli and Peng Zhou, who are a focus of the Five Eyes -intelligence probe into the -origins of COVID-19, have worked at the CSIRO in Australia where they conducted research on live bats.

This Wuhan Institute of Virology committee on which Dr Tu sits is headed by Linfa Wang, according to the website. Dr Linfa Wang, while an Honorary Professor of the Wuhan Institute of Virology between 2005 and 2011 also worked in the CSIRO Office of the Chief Executive Science Leader in Virology -between 2008 and 2011.

OVERSIGHT DEMANDS There is no suggestion Dr Drew has engaged in any untoward or unethical research through his relationship with Dr Tu. Questions for him were answered by the CSIRO.

A spokesman for the CSIRO said Dr Drew did not receive a salary or any financial benefit from Jilin Uni-versity and has never studied bat diseases. The CSIRO -defended its links with other research institutes.

"To enable collaboration, CSIRO employees are often members of affiliate research institutes, committees and other bodies both in Australia and overseas. When entering into any such arrangement, CSIRO staff are bound by CSIRO's code of conduct and related policies and procedures," it said.

Liberal MPs including Matt Canavan, Sarah Henderson and Jim Molan say partnerships between Australia and Chinese universities show an oversight body is needed to -maintain integrity in the -research sector which is among those vulnerable to foreign influence.

The Australian Strategic Policy Institute lists Jilin University as "very high risk for its high level of defence -research and links to China's nuclear weapons program".

Its project states Jilin University is directly under the Ministry of Education and came under the joint supervision of the ministry and -defence industry agency, SASTIND, in 2016.

ASPI's executive director, Peter Jennings said Chinese President Xi Jinping has brought China's university sector closer to the PLA and intelligence. "We need to now look much more carefully at those partnerships with Chinese universities to make sure there are no military implications and in particular areas of research that Australia could be doing that could benefit the PLA," he said.The CSIRO has refused to publish details of its Chinese partnerships.
---
… but Rabs not welcome among 50,000 rabid Queenslanders

QUEENSLAND will open Suncorp Stadium to 50,000 ranting banana-benders next Wednesday night - but will refuse entry to rugby league's undeniable voice, Ray Warren.

In the greatest rort since Queensland claimed Kempsey boy Greg -Inglis as its own, Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk has given her Maroons the ultimate State of Origin advantage by declaring stadiums across Brisbane will be free to host at 100 per cent capacity from Tuesday night - exactly 24 hours before Origin III kick-off - yet the border remains closed to Sydney's fans.

Honestly, if only her backline boasted the same sense of timing. Blues coach Brad Fittler dismissed the move. "It doesn't faze us," Fittler said. "We won't be intimidated and we won't be changing our preparations. We know we have all of NSW behind us." While the NSW Blues will now be up against a likely full house at Suncorp Stadium, the Queenslanders are still refusing to allow Warren in for the game - a move that could mean the legendary Channel 9 commentator has called his last Origin.

Unsurprising from a state that routinely celebrates the punching of rugby league's nicest bloke Mick Cronin, Queensland Chief Health Officer Jeannette Young has insisted Warren, Phil Gould, even eighth -Immortal Andrew Johns will have to undertake the mandatory 14-day hotel quarantine program.

This, even after Nine management offered to charter a private jet for the group. "They're welcome to come but they will have to quarantine for 14 days," said Young, effectively giving all of NSW the bird. "If they're not part of (the NRL bubble), they have to apply for an exemption to be allowed into the state. And then they would have to hotel quarantine.

"I would (grant an exemption) to allow them to come into the state, and I frequently have, but they would have to quarantine in a hotel for 14 days." Palaszczuk, meanwhile, was equally excited late on Friday afternoon, saying: "Here is a good one all Queenslanders will be happy about.

"The increase in seated capacity from 75 to 100 per cent," the premier continued, referencing open-air stadiums. "This means the Cauldron can be filled to 100 per cent -capacity for State of Origin next Wednesday night … If you don't have a ticket yet, hopefully more tickets can be -released. Let's fill that -Cauldron and cheer our mighty Maroons." Which is some backflip from a government which, earlier this year, didn't want State of Origin being played at all. A decision Fittler branded -"ridiculous".

Remember that?

The same Premier who wanted the NRL season scrapped. Or at least the three Queensland teams kept from travelling south to compete. Which on reflection, may not have been such a big deal. -Indeed, who would have noticed?

Regardless, back in April Palaszczuk sensationally ruled Brisbane out as an Origin host during the COVID-19 pandemic. A situation that, last we checked, continues.

Which is why that Queensland border remains shut to those from greater Sydney. "I love the footy as much as everyone else," the Premier said in April. "I think it's devastating we're not going to see State of Origin this year. We always have a State of Origin, but how can you have it?" Yet with the Maroons suddenly capable of an upset win … well, now the Queensland government wants to let everyone in. Except Rabs, of course. Same deal Gus and Joey Johns, with Sydneysiders generally also banned.

All of which leaves the Blues to run out on Wednesday night with -nothing but Origin favouritism.

That, and whatever Freddy has cooked up this week. Perfect.
---
THE COVID FILES OZ-FUNDED VIRUS PAPER USED MILITARY FACILITY

CHINA'S People's Liberation Army has been involved in scientific research, co-funded by the Australian government, into the origins of the coronavirus which has been published in esteemed medical journals.

In an explosive revelation, a study co-funded by the Australian Research Council and the Chinese government, and trumpeted by The University of Sydney as helping to solve the puzzle of how COVID-19 transferred from animals to humans, relied on a laboratory in the People's Liberation Army's Academy of Military Medical Sciences to conduct its "genetic sequencing" and "virus isolation".

The director of this Institute, Professor Wu-Chan Cao, who is thanked in the paper's acknowledgments for his "substantial contribution", has the rank of colonel and is a Wuhan Institute of Virology board member in a clear conflict of interest.

One of the study's co-authors, Yi-Gang Tong, began working in the same PLA-run Institute in 2005.

The Wuhan Institute of Virology is at the centre of a global probe into whether the naturally-occurring coronavirus was accidentally released from its laboratory or came from a local wet market, which scientists believe is the most likely scenario.

This study is one of two scientific papers on the coronavirus undertaken by University of Sydney virologist and evolutionary biologist, Professor Edward Holmes in conjunction with researchers in China, who received funding from the Chinese government.

Professor Holmes is highly regarded in his field and the only western scientist that was part of the consortium of the Shanghai Public Health Clinical Centre and School of Public Health who first uploaded the genetic sequence of the coronavirus on January 11.

There is no suggestion that Professor Holmes' own contribution to the research project was anything but independent, ethical and of the highest scientific standards. His work on the papers was funded by Australian grants only.

His February 2020 study looked at whether an animal called a pangolin - and not only bats - could be an intermediate host of the coronavirus to facilitate its transfer to humans.

ARMY FACILITIES Professor Holmes has used this research to call for a ban on wet markets and the trade in wildlife.

The study titled "Identifying SARS-CoV-2 related coronaviruses in Malayan pangolins" was completed and submitted by February 7, 2020 and it was peer-reviewed and published in Nature online on March 26.

"Although bats are likely reservoir hosts for SARS-CoV-2, the identity of any intermediate host that might have facilitated transfer to humans is unknown," the study states in its summary. "Here we report the identification of SARS-CoV-2 relate coronaviruses in Malayan pangolins seized in anti-smuggling operations in southern China." The Daily Telegraph can reveal that the "sequencing" and "virus isolation" on which the study relied was done by laboratories run by the PLA in China.

In fine print at the very end of the paper in the acknowledgments section, it states: "We thank Prof. Wu-Chun Cao, Dr. Na Jia, Dr. Ya-Wei Zhang, Dr. Jia-Fu Jiang, Dr. Bao-Gui Jiang, and their team in State Key Laboratory of Pathogen and Biosecurity, Beijing Institute of Microbiology and Epidemiology, Beijing for their substantial contributions to this study, including co-ordinating among research parties, conducting virus isolation, qPCR and sequencing." The State Key Laboratory of Pathogen and Biosecurity is part of the Beijing Institute of Microbiology and Epidemiology, which sits under the Academy of Military Medical Sciences.

The Academy of Military Sciences is the highest-level research institute of the People's Liberation Army.

RANKING RESEARCHER The director of this institute is Professor Wu-Chan Cao, who also received the top acknowledgment in the research paper for his "substantial contributions to this study" including "co-ordinating among research parties".

In his official biography he is pictured in his military uniform and it states he has the "rank of colonel".

"Now the director of the Institute of Microbiology and epidemiology, Military Medical Science Academy of the PLA, director of the State Key Laboratory of pathogen and Biosecurity," it states.

Colonel Cao also sits on the board for the Wuhan Institute of Virology's Scientific Advisory Committee of Centre for Emerging Infectious Diseases, according to its website.

A University of Sydney spokeswoman said Professor Holmes' work was "academically independent" and that he had not received any research or personal funding from the Chinese Government or Chinese companies or institutions.

"Where he has undertaken research with scientists from China his work has been funded by the Australian Research Council, the National Health and Medical Research Council and the University of Sydney," she said.

"We strongly defend the right of our researchers to collaborate with scientists around the world in line with all relevant Australian laws and government guidelines.

"Prof Holmes has no link with the Academy of Military Science. Their involvement with the research was declared in the acknowledgments, as is standard practice.

"Dr Cao co-ordinated the laboratory work before Prof Holmes' involvement. He did not direct or supervise the work of Prof Holmes which was undertaken independently." The University of Syndey website states: "Professor Holmes, a co-author, is the only non-China based academic on the paper." Another co-authored paper by Professor Holmes, published in Cell, provides commentary on samples taken from the Wuhan wet market and states "not all of the early (COVID-19) were market associated, it is possible that the emergence story is more complicated than first suspected".

This was cited in a press release by the Embassy of the People's Republic of China in the Commonwealth in Australia that criticised media coverage "playing up the so-called wet market in China".

WORRYING LINKS Charles Sturt University Professor of Public Ethics Clive Hamilton supported the calls for an oversight agency by Morrison government MPs.

While there was no doubting the honesty and professionalism of Australian researchers, legitimate questions should be asked as to the involvement of the Chinese military.

"It's clear that the universities are not properly overseeing the kinds of collaborations that their scientists are undertaking because there are many instances of sensitive research in Australian universities being done in collaboration with Chinese scientists with links to China's military or who are likely passing valuable information on to China's companies or intelligence -services," he said.

"Universities have been very reluctant to admit there is a problem and have consistently hidden behind the Defence Trade Controls Act which prohibits the export of sensitive technology but does not prohibit Chinese military scientists working on sensitive projects in Australian laboratories."The Australian Strategic Policy Institute's analysis of Chinese institutions has designated the Academy of Military Science very high risk as the PLA's premier institution for military science. It is -responsible for leading and co-ordinating military science for the whole military.
---
INTERIM NRL chief executive Andrew Abdo is expected to begin the painful process of streamlining head office with the backing of the ARL Commission as it prepares to confirm next week that he has the job on a permanent basis.

Abdo will front the commission next Thursday and make his pitch to remove the -'interim' from his title. It seems a mere formality that he will emerge from that meeting with their seal of approval given the way he has kept the game afloat during one of the most challenging times in rugby league's history.

Abdo has been acting in an interim capacity since late-April and, along with commission chair Peter V'landys, he has miraculously kept the NRL chugging along, negotiating the COVID-19 crisis, restless club bosses, biosecurity breaches and bouts with broadcasters.

The commission is expected to discuss the salary cap, football department cap and State of Origin. Abdo has also been working on a restructure of League Central designed to strip some of the fat from the code's running costs. It is understood he will outline his vision for the future to the commission and his coronation will be the first step in a reshaping of head office, as promised cuts begin to take effect in coming months.
---
'The great lesson of Watergate," said veteran reporter Bob Woodward, who broke the scandal that toppled US President Richard Nixon, "was that if Nixon had apologised early, or even midway through the scandal and demonstrated some soul-searching introspection, he would have been forgiven." The very same can be said of Victorian Premier Daniel Andrews over his government's decision to use private security instead of police and defence force personnel in the management of Victoria's hotel quarantine plan.

The difficulty of a crisis is that it requires momentous decisions in rapid fire time frames and that, often, it's only long after the worst of it passes that the impact of decisions become known. What might seem like a small decision at the time can, later on, become one of the most critical. It's important, when we look back at the events of Friday, March 27, not to forget this.

Do I think, knowing what they know now, that coming out of the National Cabinet at 1pm, the Andrews government would have made the decision and announced it at 3.15pm in the Premier's media conference, to use private security in quarantine hotels? No, I don't.

In a crisis, mistakes will be made, and while you must do everything to mitigate them, delay is just as risky. So, it requires a weighing of both. This is where the words of Woodward are so relevant to Victoria right now.

The Premier is being pursued over the question of who made the decision to use private security guards, not so much because it was an error but because he has used every political device available to him to avoid telling the truth. As always in political crises like this, it's the cover-up that brings the leader down.

For months, Victorians werekept in the dark about the origins of the state's second-wave outbreak until the Premier was forced to admit the disease had leaked out of the failed hotel quarantine operation when genomic testing confirmed 99 per cent of new cases were linked to hotels.

With things so clearly out of control, the federal government's repeated offer of ADF troops was finally taken up in late June - 850 personnel on their way - only to be abruptly withdrawn by the Andrews government the next day lest the "optics" of the ADF coming to the rescue in Victoria showed up the Premier, Police Minister Lisa Neville and their police and emergency union mates. We will never know what might have been the outcome if the troops had arrived. It was only after he could no longer spin away the need for an investigation that the Premier established the Coate Inquiry but, by its very terms of reference and powers under the state's Inquiries Act it lacked the grunt needed to get to the truth.

Of course, the Premier wants Coate to find that somehow no one made an actual decision to jettison police and instead employ private security, because any person who had made that decision would be culpable for the deaths of 800 Victorians out of the state's second-wave outbreak.

Powerful new industrial manslaughter laws in Victoria have put the wind up ministers, political staff and bureaucrats, and led to the farce of weeks of testimony where "I don't know", "I can't recall", "it wasn't me", and "I don't remember" has replaced any semblance of accountability in the state.

The line being put to the inquiry is that no one person made a decision here and that, instead, there was a government-wide "creeping assumption" that private security would be used, rather than Victoria Police or the ADF, to guard returning travellers. I regard this as wrong, as a lie, and nothing close to the truth.

Key decisions are made, they don't just happen. The notion that no one made this decision cannot be allowed to stand because it erodes the fundamental principle we have in our democracy of responsible government. I've been on the inside of government for 16 years - in times of crisis like the Martin Place siege, the downing of MH17, and the deployment of troops to fight against Islamic State - and let me tell you, every decision is made deliberately, the head of power to make that decision is carefully confirmed and every decision is authorised.

The decision to use private security in Victoria was made between 1pm, when National Cabinet concluded on Friday, March 27, and 3.15pm when Daniel Andrews publicly announced it. No "creeping assumption" becomes established in just two and half hours, and no Premier announces anything without being sure of what he is announcing, least of all a character like Andrews.

On Friday last week, all hell broke loose as the various parties to the COVID-19 Hotel Quarantine Inquiry lodged their closing submissions. Victoria Police couldn't have been more definitive, saying that they rejected any concept of a "creeping assumption", and said that a decision was made. Indeed, they pinpoint the time it was made as being within 1.16pm and 1.22pm - the much discussed six minute window, between then Chief Commissioner of Police Graham Ashton's text at 1.16pm asking whether his police officers would end up guarding hotels and another text at 1.22pm making clear that security guards were to be used (with a follow up text confirming this was all because of a "deal set up with DPC" (Department of Premier and Cabinet) for Victoria not to use police as in other states, but instead hire private security.

This is the critical decision that, with hindsight, led to 800 Victorians losing their life, hundreds of thousands of small businesses their livelihood, and, even as you read this today, has meant five million Melbourne residents remain in their 12th week of lockdown.

I had never attended a press conference as a member of the media until I fronted the Andrews press conference on Friday because I couldn't stomach the lies and the spin anymore. Valiant reporters have been asking tough questions for months, and for that they've been vilified online and trolled just for seeking the truth.

But isn't that what a free press is for? I couldn't care less about the #Istandwithdan haters. I have a thick skin. I've done my best to read all the evidence I can. Let me tell you, the holes are glaring, that's why, despite the Premier's skilful obfuscation, he can no longer smother and spin what's gone on.

Inside the Victoria Police submission is critical evidence that during the Ashton six-minute window there is a text from the Premier's private office to a deputy secretary (Mr Tim Ada) in the Premier's department referencing the provision of "security" in relation to the set-up of the hotel quarantine plan. This is just 19 minutes after the National Cabinet meeting had concluded that police and ADF would guard these hotels across the country, yet barely 20 minutes later, Victoria is going it alone with private security. There was never a "creeping assumption" about hotel security. There was a decision. There was a clear decision made involving the Premier's own office. It was made and communicated to Graham Ashton in the six-minute window and reconfirmed - as evidence to the Coate Inquiry shows - in a 2pm meeting between the Police Chief, the Police Minister and the head of Emergency Management Victoria. Daniel Andrews himself then announced the decision at 3.15pm out front of his own office. If Daniel Andrews thinks otherwise, he can release his phone records and those of his key minister and staff, including his chief of staff who has never given any statement or evidence to this inquiry, to clear the record. He shouldn't need to be asked to do this by the inquiry. He should volunteer it in the public interest. He can do it today and he must do if we are to respect the dead by getting to the truth of what went so catastrophically wrong.
---
LATRELL'S CRITICS WRONG: INGLIS GREG Inglis has hit back at critics of Latrell Mitchell, saying he will make the fullback position "his own" at Souths as he comes back from an injury-interrupted season.

The former NRL star, who has moved to England to play with Warrington Wolves in the Super League, dismissed claims over Mitchell's suitability for the position.

Channel 9 commentator Phil Gould has said Mitchell doesn't have the "intensity to play fullback", while Andrew Johns said in September he had been wrong to say that Mitchell was a centre, not a fullback.

Inglis, who was a development coach at Souths last season, said Mitchell would shine this year after recovering from a hamstring injury.

"One thing that I said when we signed Latrell is that he's a natural footballer, he can pass, he can run, he can meet the game," he said.

"He'll make his transition to fullback his own, he will play it in his right way and that's just something that he'll do." Inglis, who turns 34 on Friday, said Mitchell did not listen to the noise outside the Rabbitohs.

"Again the pressure of the media over there is just all going to be about Latrell, Latrell, Latrell - is he going to be right in this position, he should go back to centre," he said.

"The coaches there know what Latrell's capable of, Latrell knows what he's capable of and Latrell will make that position his own.

"He's obviously had a disrupted year with his hamstring last year and surgery but I still have chats to him and see how he's going." Inglis played 263 games in the NRL, at the Melbourne Storm and then the Rabbitohs, including the 2014 premiership.

His early retirement surprised the rugby league world, which he initially blamed on injuries before later revealing he had been suffering depression and had been diagnosed with bipolar.

He had patches where he'd been drinking too much alcohol - up to three bottles of wine on a Friday night - but has now been looking after himself.

Inglis said he was feeling better, and was open to discussing mental health, which he does through his charity the Goanna Academy.

He arrived in England this month, where it snowed in his first week, but has been keeping up with the academy's work via late-night Zoom calls.

"I just tapped into the schools about it (mental health). It's getting teachers, parents, adults to understand and look out for the signs," he said.

"Actually it's OK to talk about stuff, it's not something you should shy away from, that's one thing I'm very passionate about is actually breaking down the stigma of mental health, especially in young men." Inglis, who was a State of Origin star in his 32 caps for Queensland, follows in Alfie Langer's footsteps in the move to Warrington.

However, there was no chance he was going back to play representative football again, he said.

The door was also shut on an NRL comeback, even if his form justified it after a one-year deal at Warrington.

Inglis' Souths teammate Jason Clark, who plays at Warrington, encouraged him to come across to the north of England.

He managed to get there despite the restrictions in place from COVID-19, which has made -international travel extremely difficult.

Inglis said he wanted to play again because he had fallen back in love with the game after coaching last year but warned it would take five or six games before he was back at his best.

Inglis said he knew there would be fierce competition on the field, and that he was ready for anything the Super League could throw at him.

"I know there is going to be a target on my head but that's just how it's got to be and that's what I'm expecting anyway," he said.

His famous goanna try celebration might also make a comeback. "Over here, it depends how wet it is, it could turn into a slug that crashes into a fence," he laughed.
---
hibernation FOR 53 HOURS FROM TONIGHT, CLICK FRENZY WILL HAVE MORE THAN 1000 DEALS AND OFFERS UP FOR GRABS

IF you missed bagging a bargain in last month's end-of-financial-year sales, get yourself in front of a laptop tonight because Click Frenzy have added a new event to their calendar.

After a record-breaking online sales event in May - with more than 5.4 million visits to participating retailers - the Australian founded and owned digital-only bargain hunters' paradise introduced another event to their calendar, Julove.

The event will run for 53 hours and offer more than 1000 deals and exclusive offers from in excess of 150 brands selling in a range of categories including fashion, food, alcohol, toys, pets, electrical, sport and leisure and more, including retailers from the travel industry.

Click Frenzy managing director Grant Arnott said they hoped the added event would not only be great for consumers but help Australian retailers in these trying times.

"This is the first time we're doing an event in July, the main event happens in November and five years ago, we launched Click Frenzy Mayhem in May," he said.

"When we conceived the event in 2012, we made sure this was an Australian founded and owned online shopping event. When people shop Click Frenzy, they are helping Australian retailers and providing significant stimulus over the course of a couple of days.

"COVID-19 has created a massive shift that we're witnessing and it's creating a new breed of online shopper who were previously mainly a store shopper and may have been resistant for fear of fraud.

"We're offering the same stimulus package that we introduced at our recent Mayhem event, allowing retailers to take up on a free advertising opportunity to feature their deals. Retailers such as Eco Kids, Ecology and ISHKA have taken up this stimulus, allowing them to get in front of millions of prepped and primed shoppers." Self-confessed online shopaholic Clara Bartlett is gearing up for tonight's sale and said she tends to prefer Australian brands over others.

"I love how the sales have everything in one place, so it's easy to log on to the website and you can see every website, you don't have to shop around, you can search for the type of item you want and find it," the 30-year-old said.

"I do prefer Australian brands, especially in fashion and a lot of the smaller boutiques I like are not available in lots of places, especially Adelaide." Ms Bartlett said her focus tonight would be bagging a bargain on homewares. "It's always mostly been fashion and clothing [when I shop online] but now I'm looking at buying a house, I've been searching for homewares, basically anything I will need to fill the house, I will have ready once I've bought it.

"I do shop a bit on Black Friday and Cyber Monday and the Vogue Online Shopping night. I prefer online shopping because I'm too busy and can't always get into the store between 9-5pm or on the weekends." On average, shoppers spend $381 in the Mayhem sale, with an average saving of $158.10 but the actual range of items and prices is extensive.

Australian Retailers Association CEO Paul Zahra said the impact COVID-19 has had on the industry should not be underestimated.

"It's a great opportunity to try online shopping if you haven't before, and Click Frenzy is a great time to find a great deal, support our local brands and as a consequence, keep someone in a job.

What's the big deal * Virgin Australia: up to 30% off domestic flights (travel until October 31 this year) * Hoot Holidays: Port Douglas, five nights from $790, twin share * Bose: up to 50% off headphones * Harris Scarfe: 40% off manchester * Shaver Shop: up to 70% off best-selling brands including Dyson, Gillette, Braun, Philips * HP: Notebook 14-inch laptop 20% off * Dyson: extra 10% off V8 Origin * Michael Hill: 50% off silver jewellery, 30% off gold jewellery * Gorman: 20-70% off sitewide * Fossil: 20% off full priced items * Koala Living: 55% off storewide (dining tables, couches, lounge furniture etc) * Adidas: 40% off assorted collection * E-Living Furniture: Up to 70% storewide (bedding, bedroom, lounge furniture) * Go Gaga deal: (99% off) - KitchenAid ($629) for $6
---
We started the year with the state ablaze, and finish it with many Sydneysiders in the grip of a Christmas COVID lockdown. Little wonder politicians and bureaucrats lead the Saturday Extra list of the 50 Most Watched People of 2020. But even as their bushfire and COVID briefings became must-see TV, firefighters and scientists also found themselves in the spotlight as the nation marvelled at their expertise and determination to pull us through. The usual scandals, crims and business movers and shakers also dominated the headlines, as did the stars who lead the flight from Tinseltown to the safety of Aussiewood. And while we watched the US election as closely as if it had been our own, for many it is the unexpected heroes who made the most impact. Who can forget volunteer firey Paul Parker's choice words in telling off the PM? And comedian Celeste Barber who rallied Australians to raise a staggering $51m for the Rural Fire Service only to run into a wall of controversy about how it would be distributed? Read on to see who else made our team's list ...

STATE POLITICS HEALTH MINISTER BRAD HAZZARD HE is one of NSW'S longest-serving parliamentarians, but no role has been as important for Liberal MP Brad Hazzard than as the health minster during a one in 100-year pandemic.

Seen by his colleagues as "a safe pair of hands", Hazzard was handed the portfolio in 2017 after a series of controversies beset his predecessor. Three years on, the former high school science teacher and solicitor found himself thrust in the spotlight along with Premier Gladys Berejiklian, federal officials and senior health bureaucrats over the handling of potentially-infected passengers on the Ruby Princess.

A subsequent Special Commission of Inquiry led by Bret Walker, SC, subsequently found the health department had made "serious mistakes", including failure to ensure self-isolation aboard the ship. The incident appeared to serve as an early wake-up call. Unlike other major cities, Sydney had battled only a handful of outbreaks with no community transmissions for almost a month until the latest cluster on the northern beaches.

Fiercely protective of his department, Hazzard credits the health officials led by NSW Chief Health Officer Dr Kerry Chant for guiding the government through the pandemic. Having entered state parliament almost three decades ago, many wonder if this will be Hazzard's final - and most significant - role. LS

TREASURER DOMINIC PERROTTET NSW Treasurer Dominic Perrottet began the year expecting to deliver his fourth consecutive surplus. However, that was before devastating bushfires tore across the state followed closely by a global pandemic that forced the state into a hard lockdown.

Instead, the man touted as a future leadership contender was forced to declare NSW had been plunged into an $16 billion deficit with a return to surplus not expected until 2024.

Despite the enormous challenges, Perrottet has managed to keep the state trucking along with two COVID-19 response packages worth a record $29 billion, including critical health funding for contact tracing - argued to be the nation's best - along with vowing to use record low interest rates and the State's fiscal and economic firepower to restore jobs and rebuilt the economy.

Throughout the year Perrottet has worked closely with industry to keep Australia's biggest economy open alongside the virus. Unlike other states, the NSW budget looked beyond the crisis with a tax reform plan to drive greater home ownership, productivity and economic prosperity.

This includes a job-creating $100 billion infrastructure pipeline along with the bold move to slash the headline payroll tax rate to the lowest in the nation as part of an effort to lure national and international businesses to NSW.

With the latest COVID outbreak resulting in a temporary return of local restrictions, the economic challenges for Perrottet are far from over. LS

FORMER MP DARYL MAGUIRE WHO would have thought a NSW MP forced to resign in 2018 would be at the heart of one of 2020's biggest political scandals. The ICAC inquiry into former Wagga Wagga MP Daryl Maguire began in September, investigating allegations he used his position in government, including as parliamentary secretary, to broker business deals for his own financial gain.

Among the shocking corruption allegations was that Maguire was allegedly running a cash for visas set-up out of his parliamentary office. Maguire admitted to ICAC he received thousands in exchange for procuring visas for at least 14 people, three of whom became citizens. Under the scheme it was alleged money was funnelled to Maguire through a company called G8Way International.

But the ICAC hearing went from standard to sensational when phone taps of Maguire's conversations with Premier Gladys Berejiklian were played, in which the ex-MP discussed the Western Sydney land deal he brokered in order to pay of his debts.

The Premier was forced to admit she had been in a "close personal relationship" with Maguire since 2015. In the recording Maguire told Berejiklian the deal would pay off his $1.5m debt.

ICAC's findings are yet to be handed down, but during the headline grabbing hearing Maguire admitted to monetising his time in office. JM

FEDERAL POLITICS PRIME MINISTER SCOTT MORRISON 2020 got off the a bad start for Prime Minister Scott Morrison. While the flames of Black Summer bushfires devoured towns along the eastern states, he was snapped chilling poolside in Hawaii, in a poorly timed holiday that did not go down well with many members of the public and political commentators. But then the pandemic hit Australia hard in March and with tough decisions needing to be made, ScoMo was able to claw back respect in many quarters with his resolute stance.

Some of the most historic decisions of the year were made by Morrison and the newly formed national cabinet, including implementing level four travel restrictions and a national lockdown.

Morrison's stance against China also made headlines around the world as he pushed ahead with calls for an investigation into the origins of the virus, despite emphatic pushback from our major trading partner.

Having learned from his early stumbles in the Black Summer bushfires, when many Australians criticised the PM for his lack of visibility during the crisis, Morrison was talking to the public almost daily via his televised press conferences at the height of the pandemic.

Australians have seen more of our Prime Minister than ever this year, and opinion polls show him holding a healthy lead in both the preferred PM and leader satisfaction polls.

But while the all-consuming pandemic has allowed the PM a chance to avoid some of the more controversial political topics, such as the climate change debate, next year will offer another stern test of his public support if cases decline and the country gets to grips with the financial aftermath. JM

TREASURER JOSH FRYDENBERG ONE of the hardest and most high -pressure jobs during a national crisis is that of treasurer, given the task of keeping the economy stable and food on the dinner table for millions of Australians, thousands of whom lost their jobs overnight.

Josh Frydenberg had to give Australians the devastating news that the pandemic had tipped country into recession for the first time in 29 years.

And with the backdrop of the virus Frydenberg was given the enormous task of trying to keep people in jobs and businesses viable when most of the country was shut down.

The resulting JobKeeper policy was one of the most influential government measures of the year, managing to support businesses to keep on employees even when retail turnover was plummeting.

The Treasurer again dominated the headlines when the government announced an increase to the JobKeeper payment for those who had lost their jobs.

The biggest challenge for Frydenberg this year was delivering one of the most important federal budgets of our time. The pandemic dashed the government's hopes of a surplus, and instead Frydenberg's budget forecasted a net national debt of $966 billion by 2024.

The budget featured cash payments for the elderly to stimulate spending, and introduced the JobMaker program, incentivising businesses to hire new employees.

Frydenberg also delivered tax cuts, the Home Builder scheme, more home care packages and a boost for the manufacturing sector.

While 2020 was all about short-term emergency policies, once the JobKeeper payments expire in March next year and the country looks to get back to some semblance of normal, the recovery will be an even tougher challenge for one of the government's most challenging portfolios. JM

COVID NSW CHIEF MEDICAL OFFICER DR KERRY CHANT IT is rare that a bureaucrat ends up centrestage - except for when there is a controversy. Not so for NSW chief health officer Dr Kerry Chant who overnight became one of our most recognisable faces as she was beamed into the homes of millions for the best part of the year to deliver the latest on the pandemic.

Embroiled early on in the Ruby Princess scandal that questioned some of the decisions of her department's bureaucrats, Dr Chant quickly recovered to become a trusted source for information about the pandemic, local outbreaks and contact-tracing.

At the start of the pandemic, health ministerBrad Hazzard revealed Chant was barely sleeping, at one stage working 31 hours straight before fronting the cameras. During an interview, Chant admitted she had made it to the supermarket just once in the past eight weeks, with her 19-year-old daughter doing most of the cooking.

In recognition of her achievements, the University of NSW, where Chant obtained her medical degree, recently awarded her the 2020 Chancellor's Award for Exceptional Alumni Achievement. In an acceptance speech Chant delivered remotely, the Epping resident revealed it was her passion to achieve the elimination of hepatitis C.

"Once I divert my attention away from COVID-19, my passion for the elimination of hepatitis C and working in partnership with academics, non-government organisations and the community in responding to hepatitis C will continue," she said. LS

PROFESSOR JOHN SKERRITT WHEN Australians begin receiving their first COVID vaccines, it will be as a result of the work of Health Department deputy secretary responsible for the Therapeutic Goods Administration, Adjunct Professor John Skerritt.

In charge of whether the vaccines will be approved for use, the former medical researcher was working in a laboratory when the race began to find a cure for AIDS back it the 1980s.

Now overseeing the TGA, he will play a critical role in deciding whether any of the vaccines the federal government has signed up for are good to go, along with overseeing the critical transportation here. In the case of the Pfizer vaccine, which has to be kept at -70C, it will be shipped by air and kept in dry ice with small IT devices attached to each batch to remotely transmit if a pot heats up accidentally.

Skerritt, who is operating on "four to five hours" sleep, has effectively told his team to "cancel summer" in order to have the vaccines ready in March rollout. Describing the vaccine development effort as the "biggest thing in medicine in the last 100 years" Skerritt has said that while vaccination would remain an individual decision, those thinking about giving it a miss were strongly urged to consider the community.

"It's not something you do for yourself," he said. "Think about what your position might do to your grandmother, your neighbour's grandmother or just someone you might walk past at Coles or Woolworths - that little old lady you've never met." "We recognise that at the end of the day it will be your right of choice as to whether to be vaccinated, but we encourage all people to think about the broader public good." LS

DEPUTY PREMIER JOHN BARILARO IT was a fiery and frenetic year for NSW Deputy Premier John Barilaro, whose brand of all-or-nothing politics very nearly proved his undoing.

His father died, he lost his licence for speeding, and he bizarrely became the obsession of popular YouTube conspiracy theorist cum political commentator and self-styled comedian Jordan Shanks who attacked him over a range of topics including bushfires and brumbies.

Barilaro took four weeks' mental health leave in September after threatening to split the Coalition government over a planning policy designed to expand koala protections.

The NSW Nationals leader sent a series of text message tirades to political allies when his bid for federal politics collapsed in May.

Sky News revealed Barilaro accused federal Nationals leader Michael McCormack of undermining his attempt to contest the Eden-Monaro by-election.

"To feel threatened by me clearly shows you have failed your team and failed as a leader. You will never be acknowledged by me as our leader. You aren't. You never will be," Barilaro wrote to McCormack.

"The Nats had a chance to create history, to change momentum, and you had a candidate that was prepared to risk everything to make it happen. What did you risk? Nothing. Hope you are proud of yourself." The Daily Telegraph revealed Mr Barilaro told a parliamentary colleague that friend and fellow minister Andrew Constance was a "c…" for weighing up whether to contest Eden-Monaro as well.

The NSW Nationals leader remains popular among his party and voter base in the bush.

He has vowed to have more of his political fights behind closed doors next year, believing he has proved to swing voters in the bush the NSW Nationals are not beholden to the Liberal party. JM

PREMIER GLADYS BEREJIKLIAN PREMIER Gladys Berejiklian has had the most tumultuous year of her political career, leading the state through the bushfires then the pandemic, before being embroiled in personal and political scandal.

There's no doubt she has been regarded as a strong leader throughout much of the year, but it didn't start out that way.

The Ruby Princess debacle which cost the lives of many and led to a massive spread of COVID across the country could have been avoided with stronger restrictions by NSW Health on quarantine.

The Premier was able to get through the scandal to put NSW into a tough lockdown, keeping people confined to their homes for all but the most essential of activities.

Berejiklian remained popular with voters, especially as her interstate colleagues slammed their borders shut while she vowed to keep the state open.

All in all the year was looking better for one of the most hardworking politicians in Australia but then the Daryl Maguire scandal hit.

News of Berejiklian's close relationship with the disgraced MP sent shockwaves through her government and shattered her reputation as a stickler for the rules. Raising even more eyebrows was the fact Berejiklian had fired Maguire when his dodgy deeds first came to light.

Speculation as to whether she would resign dominated the news cycle for weeks, as debate raged as to whether she had breached her own ministerial code of conduct.

Berejiklian could have been forgiven for approaching the end of 2020 with a sense of relief at having weathered its storms and due some well-earnt rest.

But the rapidly blooming Avalon COVID cluster put an end to any thoughts like that.

Another hill to climb, and one which the state leader is so far tackling with her usual stoicism and calm. JM

CMO PAUL KELLY BEFORE 2020 it's fair to say most Australians had no clue who our chief medical officer was. Paul Kelly was thrust into the spotlight as deputy CMO to Brendan Murphy, with both men alongside Nick Coatsworth appearing on televisions across the country to provide COVID information, advice and data to the public. Since June Professor Kelly has been acting in the role of CMO and has been steering the fight to flatten the curve with his team of pandemic experts. The decision to go for a flatten-thecurve strategy, or suppression, rather than eradication, was made by the expert medical panel and has shaped the country's pandemic response. Professor Kelly has been tough on those flouting health advice from the beginning of the pandemic. His chastisement of young people not following the rules and businesses not enforcing social distancing made headlines with the stark warning "young people have died". Professor Kelly was pushed by journalists after promising the release of the government's coronavirus modelling, only to backtrack at a later press conference. It was a time when the public was desperate to know the figures influencing the sweeping restrictions that forced many businesses to close their doors during lockdown. The modelling was eventually released in April. JM

BUSHFIRES RFS VOLUNTEER PAUL PARKER VOLUNTEER firefighter Paul Parker landed his 20 seconds of fame after a spontaneous outburst directed at Scott Morrison at the height of the bushfire crisis. The Rural Fire Service member made his anti-ScoMo sentiment clear to an unsuspecting Channel 7 cameraman after returning from the fire ground on the far south coast in early January. In his RFS truck, Mr Parker, 57, sidled up to the cameraman in Nelligen and asked if he was "from the media". "Go and tell the Prime Minister to go and get f...ed from Nelligen," Parker said. "We really enjoy doing this s... f...khead." He later collapsed from exhaustion on the side of the road. Explaining his strong choice of words weeks later, Parker said it was in response to the PM's comments about whether RFS volunteers should be paid. But Morrison, whose standing in the fire-affected communities had already weathered a battering after his frosty reception in Cobargo days earlier, said his comments were misreported. After Parker's clip was aired on Seven News and, subsequently, by international media outlets, he became a lightning rod of anger aimed at the federal government's handling of the bushfires. He popped up on Channel 10's The Project, inspired the #Istandwithfiremanpaul Twitter trend, got a mention in federal parliament and a GoFundMe page. Even strangers were turning up at his local pub to leave money on the bar for his next beer. According to the RFS, Parker was never dismissed and continues to be a member. ABM

COMEDIAN CELESTE BARBER MOVED by the devastation of the Black Summer bushfires that threatened members of her family living at Eden on the far south coast of NSW, comedian Celeste Barber launched a Facebook fundraiser in January in the hope of raising $300,000 for the NSW Rural Fire Service (RFS) and Brigades Donation Fund. The fundraiser quickly went viral, with about 1.3 million donors chipping in. Soon enough Barber had raised $51.3m. An overjoyed Barber declared she would share the funds around: "I'm going to make sure Victoria gets some, that South Australia gets some, also families of people who have died in these fires, the wildlife …" But with the RFS donation fund controlled by a trust deed, it emerged the funds could only be spent on the purchase and maintenance of equipment, training and administrative costs for the RFS and could not be passed on to fire services in other states and charities, such as the Australian Red Cross and animal welfare group WIRES. Given the amount of backlash the RFS received from donors hoping their money would be spread around, the RFS decided to consult the Supreme Court. In May the court confirmed the money could not be distributed but could be used to support rural firefighters injured while fighting fires, the families of fallen firefighters and for trauma counselling. Barber, always popular on social media, finished the year as Google's No.1 trending public figure. AS

LAW & ORDER NSW POLICE COMMISSIONER MICK FULLER HANDLING a global pandemic wasn't part of the job description when Mick Fuller signed on as the NSW Police Commissioner in 2017. But if it wasn't for police on the doors at quarantine hotels in 2020, NSW may have faced the same crippling coronavirus outbreak as Victoria. Fuller was forced to step outside the traditional boundaries of a commissioner's role this year and the stakes were high. In March, NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian asked him to lead the combat agency for the health crisis. That meant overseeing the enormous hotel quarantine operation, enforcing strict and sometimes unpopular public health orders and administering the NSW/Victoria border closure with his own troops. Fuller had experience in major events from his time as the Central Metropolitan Region commander but this represented an unprecedented logistical challenge. At its peak, NSW Police were manning 28 quarantine hotels around Sydney and managing the arrival of up to 500 travellers a day. To date, almost 110,000 travellers have been through a 14-day quarantine under his watch. Fuller was called on again in July to close and enforce the Victorian/NSW border. He had 36 hours to make it happen, including mobilising 700 police officers from all over the state to man checkpoints in remote locations. In between all that was the contentious opposition to the Black Lives Matter protest and his decision to take on the investigation into the virusladen Ruby Princess cruise ship. After little more than 10 days off all year, it is understood Fuller had planned a Queensland holiday in January. But COVID-19 has shaken things up again for the commissioner with the northern beaches cluster putting a ban on Sydneysiders travelling north. ABM

EDUCATION NSW TEACHERS FEDERATION BOSS ANGELO GAVRIELATOS WHEN the pandemic pushed schooling from the classroom to the loungeroom, there was a new-found respect for teachers. While COVID-19 ultimately consumed his first full year as NSW Teachers Federation president, Angelo Gavrielatos has been buoyed by peak public support for the state's public school teachers. The NSW Teachers Federation cited polling that suggested 91 per cent of parents gained more respect for the profession since the outbreak of COVID-19. The NSW Teachers Federation largely gave the government free rein during the pandemic, other than fighting for the right of chronically ill, pregnant and older teachers to work from home. The government was loath to admit it needed schools open for the good of the economy for fear Gavrielatos would take them to task over any implication teachers are glorified child minders. The kid gloves will be off next year when Gavrielatos leverages all that public goodwill in his fight for better conditions and pay for teachers. Expect fireworks when the findings of an independent review of changing teacher workload come down in February, which are likely to show teachers burdened by administrative tasks need more time and departmental support to do their jobs. New salary negotiations are due to begin in October and Gavrielatos already has his nose out of joint over the Berejiklian's government's 12-month teacher wage freeze announced in May. Gavrielatos this year threw his union's support behind The Sunday Telegraph's campaign for more school counsellors and mandatory mental health training for teachers. While teachers will be afforded the training they asked for, he will not rest until there is at least one school counsellor for every 500 students. JM

CATHOLIC SCHOOLS NSW CEO DALLAS McINERNEY CATHOLIC Schools NSW boss Dallas McInerney this year proved himself to be one of the shrewdest operators in the state's education system. The former corporate regulator and financier has arrested falling enrolments at the state's Catholic schools, which started sliding on the back of the 2017 Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse. With student numbers shored up, he is going on a building spree worth close to $500m to reverse decades of decay. It has been said the building bonanza is the largest capital expansion in Australian Catholic education history. If it sounds like McInerney is in a rush to cement Catholic schools as the clear choice between public and high priced private schools, it could be because Canberra is calling. McInerney is the hot favourite to replace NSW Senator Jim Molan at the next federal election, which could be called as soon as August 7. At a series of late-night crisis meetings of the NSW Education Standards Authority board this year, McInerney played a large role ensuring the HSC went ahead during the pandemic. It was McInerney who spearheaded the campaign to have NSW chief health officer Kerry Chant overturn a ban on the first XV GPS rugby competition between top private schools such as St Ignatius' College Riverview, The King's School and St Joseph's College. JM EDUCATION MINISTER SARAH MITCHELL BUSHFIRES, bomb threats and a pandemic proved the making of Education Minister Sarah Mitchell. In her first full year in the job, Ms Mitchell steered more than 800,000 students from 2209 public schools through natural and public health disasters. The Berejiklian government has dined out on its investment in new and upgraded schools, but Mitchell's year was defined by the schools she was forced to close.

During the Black Summer bushfires 350 public schools across the state were closed, two of which burned down. A month after the bushfire season ended, Mitchell defied the NSW Teachers Federation to keep NSW public schools open during the pandemic for families who could not keep their children at home. Students who could stay home spent a month learning online, thanks in no small part to the swift dispatch of 13,520 computers and 8440 internet modems. Positive cases of COVID-19 have so far forced the closure of 35 public schools, most of which were cleaned and reopened within a day. HSC students sat their final exams against the odds, despite temporary school closures because of more than 30 bomb threats. Mitchell has used the dying days of 2020 to finally step out of the shadow of her predecessor, Rob Stokes, and set her own agenda. A rush of reforms included clawing back power for schools from failing principals with new enforceable targets for HSC results, phonics, NAPLAN scores, attendance, wellbeing and the real-world success of graduates. Mitchell also ushered in much needed mandatory mental health training for teachers. The Sunday Telegraph is still calling on Mitchell to increase the number of school counsellors to at least one for every 500 students to address an alarming increase in youth suicide. JM

PROPERTY JEAN NASSIF REVELATIONS about cocaine possession, fast cars, a lawsuit against broadcaster Ray Hadley and multimillion-dollar property wins has meant Jean Nassif's 2020 has been a rollercoaster. The Toplace founder and glamorous property developer's year started with a bang amid revelations he pleaded guilty to possessing a small amount of cocaine at The Star casino in September 2019. The 52-year-old was celebrating wife Nissy's 32nd birthday when police with drug sniffer dogs found 0.35g. This is the same Nissy made famous after Nassif gifted her a Lamborghini with the words: "Congratulations Mrs Nassif. You like?" The 2019 video went viral. Nassif was given an 18-month conditional release order and no conviction was recorded on account of his good character. He then took on 2GB giant Ray Hadley in the Federal Court, alleging Hadley falsely claimed on his top rating radio show that Nassif was a shonky builder. The matter will drag into 2021, with reports Hadley and Nassif are hoping to settle the matter. In October The Sunday Telegraph revealed Nassif said he would voluntarily replace almost 380 bathrooms in a Botany apartment complex after NSW Building Commissioner David Chandler uncovered serious flaws during destructive testing. But it wasn't all that bad. Throughout 2020 the NSW government fast-tracked the approval of a 167m tower at 189 Macquarie St in Parramatta. In another state government decision, which will net his company tens of millions, large swathes of Castle Hill (including 6000sq m of his property) was rezoned to high density - increasing the property value by an estimated 60 per cent. BP IN THE COURTS DANNY AND LEILA ABDALLAH OUT of unspeakable tragedy emerged this year's most inspiring story of love and forgiveness. Siblings Antony, 13, Angelina, 12, and Sienna Abdallah, 9, and their 11-yearold cousin, Veronique Sakr, were killed instantly by drunk and high driver Samuel William Davidson, 30, on February 1. Angelina would have turned 13 on Christmas Eve. The children had been out for ice cream on a hot summer's night when Davidson lost control of his speeding Mitsubishi four-wheel-drive, mounted the footpath and killed the children. Days after her children, Sienna, Angelina and Antony, died their mother, Leila Abdallah, forgave the driver. "The guy, I know he was drunk, driving on this street. Right now I can't hate him. I don't want to see him, I don't hate him," she told reporters. "I think in my heart to forgive him … I'm not going to hate him, because that's not who we are." Leila and Danny, as well as Veronique's mother, Bridgette Sakr, have all publicly forgiven the man who killed their children. While their Catholic faith is a constant source of comfort, it hasn't blunted the constant pain the parents are still suffering. People across NSW will be encouraged to reflect on the need for forgiveness in their own lives and look to the example set by the Abdallah and Sakr families on February 1, which will be called i4give day. Davidson will be sentenced on manlaughter charges next year. JM

MICK HAWI EVEN from beyond the grave, murdered former Comanchero bikie boss Mick Hawi had influence in 2020. The trial of two men charged with his killing yielded little in the way of results for the prosecution and police in arguably the biggest organised crime assassination case this decade. Yusuf Nazlioglu and Jamal Eljaidi were found not guilty by a jury in September. One of the key pieces of evidence before the court was that Hawi's shooter was believed to be about 185cm and the driver was about 177cm. Nazlioglu and Eljaidi didn't match this. Eljaidi is close to 200cm tall. Another man, Ahmad Doudar pleaded guilty to being an accessory after the fact to the murder. The result was Doudar being sentenced to a stint in jail so short he might not have enough time to finish a cup of coffee while he's there (even less if he wins his pending appeal). The case reached farcical levels when, after the trial, a police complaint letter about how the crown ran the trial was posted to social media. BH

MICHAEL IBRAHIM THE ever-intriguing Ibrahim family were among the most talked about people this year thanks to the high point of the drug bust that saw John's younger brother Michael locked up for a maximum of 30 years. Getting sucked in by an undercover cop who got him on the line for importing almost two tonnes of drugs and millions of cigarettes didn't give Michael much wiggle room when he was sentenced. Michael pleaded guilty at an early stage of the case - earning him time off his sentence as an incentive. He also hired Australia's most expensive barrister, Bret Walker SC, to run his sentencing hearing. It didn't seem to have much affect when Judge Dina Yehia sentenced Ibrahim to a maximum 30 years' prison with a minimum 18-year term, in the Downing Centre District Court in May. BH

IRISH BACKBACKERS NATHAN KELLY AND CHRISTOPHER McLAUGHLIN ESTABLISHED wisdom suggests you should always reject the first offer during any negotiation. For the office of DPP Lloyd Babb SC, this case was the exception to the rule and the reason it was one of the most discussed criminal cases of 2020. Irish backpackers Nathan Kelly and Christopher McLaughlin were acquitted by a jury in the NSW Supreme Court of murdering Paul Tavelardis during a huge night on the drink in Sydney's inner west in December 2018. But it didn't have to be this way. McLaughlin's lawyers Simon Joyner and Margaret Cunneen SC made numerous offers to the ODPP for their client to plead guilty to manslaughter in the year leading up to the murder trial, only to have Babb's office reject the approach. "It was truly an unusual set of circumstances - we had no alternative but to run a vigorous defence and we won," Joyner said. The trial heard that witnesses rang Triple-0 and said "there's two men killing a guy, just get the police here". Kelly and McLaughlin were acquitted on September 21 and caught the first plane back to Ireland - at taxpayer expense. BH

BEN ROBERTS SMITH THE nation's most decorated living war hero and Victoria Cross recipient was never far from the headlines in 2020 as the Seven West Media executive sued Nine/Fairfax over 2018 newspaper reports which he says are defamatory because they portray him as someone who committed murder while on deployment to Afghanistan. Roberts-Smith claims he was defamed in reports in which it was alleged was involved in unlawful killings as an Australian soldier in Afghanistan between 2009 and 2012. Roberts-Smith will also dispute a separate allegation at the defamation trial that he punched a woman in a domestic violence incident in 2018. The trials was due before the court in June but had to be delayed until 2021 following the coronavirus outbreak. It's now set down for June next year. After hiring an expensive team of lawyers and a high-profile PR firm to counter the claims - at a high cost reportedly also borne by his Seven boss Kerry Stokes - the retired Special Air Service soldier asked that the six-week trial be brought forward as it is causing him additional stress and anxiety. In addition to an Australian Defence Force investigation into war crimes, Roberts-Smith is also the subject of two Australian Federal Police investigations. Adding to the courtroom intrigue, Roberts-Smith was photographed holding hands and riding scooters with a female defamation lawyer who works for his Sydney lawyer in August. AS

SAM BURGESS HIT with an interim AVO after police alleged he threatened his ex-father-inlaw, Mitchell Hooke, during a visit to Hooke's Southern Highlands home in October, 2019, South Sydney star Sam Burgess spent 2020 battling two police charges - one of intimidation, the other of domestic assault - after his estranged wife, Phoebe Burgess, reported him. Burgess would plead not guilty to both charges when the estranged couple finally faced off in a Moss Vale courtroom in November, 2020. The court appearance came a month after the NSW Police and NRL integrity unit launched separate investigations into allegations South Sydney doctor Andrew McDonald was called to Burgess's eastern suburbs home in November, 2018, to attend the rugby league player following a dayslong drug-fuelled bender. McDonald allegedly administered a liquid tranquilliser prescribed in Mitchell Hooke's name that Hooke, the former CEO of the Minerals Council of Australia, acquired on his son-in-law's behalf. A drug test, for which Burgess allegedly used a false name, was subsequently ordered by South Sydney and conducted in the underground carpark of South's Juniors with Burgess testing positive for MDMA and ketamine. These allegations were contained in a 50-page police statement filed by Ms Burgess in September. Burgess, who denies any wrong doing, would step down from his coaching assistant duties at Souths and his Fox Sports commentary role while Souths would deny being part of any alleged cover-up. AS

DYSON HEYDON MAN rises to the absolute apex of his profession and decades later is exposed to have been a sex harasser. Who'd have thought it? That was the story of 77-year-old ex-High Court justice Dyson Heydon's 2020. In June an independent inquiry handed down its damning finding that Heydon sexually harassed six young female associates during his career. High Court Chief Justice Susan Keifel ordered the inquiry after two of Heydon's former associates blew the whistle on their former boss's creepy proclivities. Aggravating the embarrassment was that it happened when he was on duty for Australia's highest court. "We are ashamed that this could have happened at the High Court of Australia," said Chief Justice Kiefel in a statement. It was an astonishing fall from grace from one of the country's most revered legal minds. Things got worse for him after the release of the report with more people coming forward claiming to have been on the receiving end of similar treatment from Heydon. Heydon denied the inquiry's findings and had his lawyers issue a statement that included the following clarification: "Our client says that if any conduct of his has caused offence, that result was inadvertent and unintended, and he apologises for any offence caused." He added: "We have asked the High Court to convey that directly to the associate complainants." The ex-judge didn't stop there. He then transitioned onto the front foot and questioned the inquiry's credibility. ''The inquiry was an internal administrative inquiry and was conducted by a public servant and not by a lawyer, judge or a tribunal member. It was conducted without having statutory powers of investigation and of administering affirmations or oaths." Perhaps unsurprisingly, this did not change the inquiry's findings - or the public's reaction to them. BH

MEDIA HUGH MARKS HAVING confirmed the breakdown of his marriage in November, 2019, Nine media boss Hugh Marks kicked off 2020 with a new role after being appointed to the board of real estate business Domain Group (59 per cent owned by Nine). By March - refreshed by his annual trip to the Australian Open tennis in Melbourne the month earlier - Marks was forced to take an axe to Nine's drama slate along with children's productions. With Nine feeling the pinch along with other media companies due to the global advertising downturn, in August the company announced a substantial net loss. It came after Nine's streaming service, Stan, failed to win the contract for the most hotly contested international programming catalogue of the year, the rights to the WarnerMedia and HBO Max library (Games Of Thrones, Succession) going to Foxtel. This, in a year in which Stan also faced up to the loss of Disney programming to Disney+ but picked up rugby union. Marks was photographed picnicking in a Mosman park with his personal assistant in May. November brought his shock resignation after inquiries by this newspaper revealed the Nine CEO was in a relationship with a subordinate, newly departed managing director of commercial Alexi Baker. AS

ALAN JONES AFTER 35 years dominating Sydney talk radio on stations 2UE and 2GB, veteran broadcaster Alan Jones retired from radio in May - one year into a two-year contract - following an advertiser boycott that smashed Nine Radio's bottom line in 2019. It came after Jones took aim at New Zealand PM Jacinda Ardern and suggested Scott Morrison "shove a sock down her throat" after Ardern told a Pacific Island conference Australia would "have to answer to the Pacific" on climate change. Replaced by the younger Ben Fordham, the brother of Jones's manager, Jones soon announced he had signed a lucrative deal with TV broadcaster Sky News to host a weeknight prime time commentary program. He left 2GB in a blaze of glory with tributes from everyone from tennis star Roger Federer to actor Russell Crowe and billionaire James Packer. AS

CHRISTINE HOLGATE THE CEO of Australia Post came under fire in October after appearing before the Senate's Environment and Communications Committee to explain her decision to reward four executives in 2018 with Cartier watches. She told the committee the watches were gifted to four senior staff who had done an "inordinate amount of work" negotiating a contract that saw three of the four big banks agree to pay Australia Post, which operates like a publicly-owned business, $66m for providing financial services, a boost to the revenue streams of 3000 franchisees who run post offices. While Holgate denied taxpayers had paid for the watches - which totalled $20,000 and were paid for on a corporate credit card - PM Scott Morrison - unconcerned Australia Post is not federally funded - denounced the corporate gifts as "disgraceful" and demanded Holgate stand down, which she did. In November the humiliated Holgate resigned as reports surfaced suggesting Australia Post's chairman, Lucio Di Bartolomeo, failed to back his executive. An expensive report into the whole affair (and paid for by the taxpayer) was ordered by the PM and is yet to be released, with The Australian's Robert Gottliebsen reporting it found Holgate's actions justified but damned the government. AS

JAMES PACKER THE major shareholder of Crown Resorts Ltd spent 2020 in the sights of the NSW Independent Liquor and Gaming Authority after an inquiry was launched in January, 2020, to determine the billionaire's fitness to hold a casino licence in Sydney. Called to give evidence, a sweaty, halting Packer addressed the inquiry via video link from his luxury yacht in October and admitted threats he'd made towards a financier in 2015 were "shameful" and "disgraceful". He added strong medication makes it difficult for him to recall events. The inquiry, conducted by former Supreme Court judge Patricia Bergin - who is due to hand down her findings by February 1 -- was investigating evidence of money laundering at Crown's Melbourne casino and ties to junket tour operators linked to organised criminals. Bergin is examining whether Packer's casino violated strict ownership restrictions placed on the Barangaroo project when he attempted to sell almost half his stake in his casino business to Hong Kong businessman Lawrence Ho in 2019. With the $2.2bn Barangaroo casino opening delayed and Crown's Sydney licence in jeopardy, a possible merger between Crown and rival The Star is being talked up in Sydney while the Victorian government has ordered a probe into Packer's Melbourne operations. AS

CELEBRITIES ACTOR CHRIS HEMSWORTH ACTOR CHRIS HEMSWORTH NO global pandemic is going to get in the way of our homegrown superhero. It has been a big year for Byron Bay royalty Chris Hemsworth. When his action film Extraction was released in April it quickly became a hit for Netflix and despite mixed reviews from critics, it wrote itself into the streamer's history books as the most-watched original title ever. It was little wonder then that Netlfix execs moved quickly to secure Hemsworth's services and The Sunday Telegraph broke the news in September that the Thor star had signed a multi-million-dollar four-film contract with Netflix, including Extraction 2 and 3. He was instrumental in bringing production of the first movie - Spiderhead - to our shores and his latest Marvel instalment - Thor: Love And Thunder - has seen a cavalcade of stars, including Natalie Portman and Christian Bale, make Australia home temporarily. Hemsworth is working hard to promote Australia as a filming destination and it's believed he is agitating for more of his films to be made here. The unofficial face of beautiful Byron has also been doing his bit for the local tourism business which was decimated by COVID-19 lockdowns and, with actor wife Elsa Pataky, has been posting beautiful location shots with his family. DM

NICOLE KIDMAN WITH film and television production in Australia grinding to a halt earlier this year as the pandemic took hold, the industry was brought to its knees. Local margins are wafer thin at the best of times and this halt to filming across the country put many productions at risk and threatened the livelihood of the hundreds of actors and production staff involved in the industry. An injection of something, anything, was needed to keep the business alive and the first to step up to the plate and provide that was Nicole Kidman. When she announced she would be returning home to film her new series Nine Perfect Strangers in and around Byron Bay - she brought with her a massive $100m budget and a conga line of celebrities like Melissa McCarthy, Regina Hall, Luke Evans and Bobby Cannavale to our shores. Underlining the investment in local talent is the fact the series is based on the book by Sydney author Liane Moriarty. Of course, a single production could not provide work for everyone, but Kidman moved early and was the first in a long line of international productions taking advantage of our excellent COVID standing. If helping to save the local industry wasn't enough to get Kidman on the list of 50 Most Talked About People of 2020, she also fronted one of the most talked about thrillers of the year in The Undoing, an eight-part series that also stars Hugh Grant. It helped to break viewing records for streaming platform Binge and also saw the Aussie star's profile painted on the side of an 18- storey apartment block in Sydney. DM

CHEF AND TV PRESENTER PETE EVANS 2020 was the gift that kept giving, but in Pete Evans' case, it kept taking away. The year started off tame enough but then the pandemic hit. The TV chef who called coronavirus a 'scamdemic' on social media, went live on April 9 in front of a pink and purple hued disco lamp thing called a BioCharger which he was flogging for $14,900 on his website. He claimed it had a couple of recipes for "the Wuhan coronavirus in there" which earned him a $25,000 fine from the health watchdog. Evan's posting of ever more bizarre claims about paedophiles running the world, and his anti-vax views, was a recipe for career disaster. In May Seven's My Kitchen Rules parted ways with their star of 10 years. What followed was a 'Pauline Hanson moment' on 60 Minutes in June where he suggested if he disappeared evil forces were at play: "If I disappear in a weird freakin' accident, it wasn't an accident, OK?" As he announced he was working on a cannabis cookbook, he doubled down on 'toxins' in vaccines. He promoted land sales in an eco-commune that didn't have council approval and said he'd leave Facebook but never did. But it was his neo-Nazi post of a butterfly sporting the sonnenrad, the "sunwheel swastika", or black sun that cost him almost everything. Evans was "cancelled" as his cookbook publisher Pan Macmillan, bookstore Dymocks, BIG W, Coles, kitchenware company Baccarat, Woolworths, House homewares, Target, Kmart, Booktopia and David Jones distanced themselves as did Channel 10's I'm a Celebrity Get Me Out of Here. This week his official page was removed from Facebook. What was left was a man believing the whole thing had nothing to do with his posts and everything to do with a giant media conspiracy to shut him up. JH

PROMOTER MICHAEL GUDINSKI WHEN the gigs stopped in March the music industry got busy online. Promoter Michael Gudinski knew artists and arts workers needed a sense of purpose to get through the pandemic shutdown and their financial uncertainty and that fans isolated in their homes could do with some spirit boosting. His first big virtual gig was the wildly ambitious Music From The Home Front virtual concert on Anzac Day night featuring "live" performances from Jimmy Barnes and family, Missy Higgins and Tim Minchin and dozens of orchestra members and singers. That success inspired him to put his money where his mouth has been for years, lamenting the lack of live music on Australian TV and in the middle of COVID-19, he launched new show The Sound, which completed two seasons worth of unforgettable performances from Midnight Oil to Ruel. KMc

RAPPER THE KID LAROI CHARLTON Howard, the 17-year-old First Nations rapper and singer from Sydney, became Australia's first bona fide global hip hop star. The Kid Laroi was mentored by the late chart slayer Juice Wrld and the posthumous release of their collab track Go was the Australian artist's first to land on the US Billboard charts. Kid Laroi's debut mixtake F… Love peaked at No 3 in Australia and the US, propelled by a succession of killer tracks including Tell My Why, So Done and Without You. Now based in LA with his family, the prodigiously talented artist has generated more than one billion streams over the past year. KMc

ACTOR HUGH SHERIDAN AFTER returning to Australia from the US, actor Hugh Sheridan initially tested negative and then positive on August 28 for coronavirus. On September 2 while in quarantine he told his social media followers it was "scary, frustrating and lonely" though he had, he said, no symptoms. Then two days later an update: Sheridan's latest test was negative and doctors believed his previous test had been a false positive. Then in October, Sheridan, a household name since starring in Channel 7's Packed To The Rafters penned a letter for Stellar magazine in which the 35-year-old said he wanted to be the person who "sticks up for people who don't pick a label". He then announced he was coming out "as a human being" and revealed he'd been bullied at school and called "faggot". The actor said he had had relationships with both sexes. Not everyone praised him for his declaration with some gays incensed that Sheridan hadn't stood with them at an earlier stage. It wasn't until it was revealed the following month that Sheridan had been cast in the lead role of the musical Hedwig and The Angry Inch for the forthcoming 2021 Sydney Festival that his critics really emerged - and they weren't homophobic straights and they weren't shunned gays either. They were a furious trans community who felt the role - of genderqueer rock singer from Germany who has a botched sex change operation and is left with an "angry inch" should have gone to a transgender performer. To the offended Queer Artist Alliance Australia, Sheridan - despite having just outed himself as a "human" nonbinary LGBT member - didn't have what it takes. As a result, the acclaimed show was cancelled and Sheridan admitted to hospital. Last week he told The Sunday Telegraph this was to deal with an "anxiety attack" due to an overloaded schedule. AS

SINGER GUY SEBASTIAN THE Choir chart star continued to dominate the Australian airwaves with its sister single, Standing With You, proving to be another top 10 hit. The pop star and television personality found out who his industry friends were when some peers sought to cancel him for sharing a stage with the PM during an arts grants package announce. And his offstage drama continued when his Federal Court fight with former manager Titus Day became a criminal matter with the talent wrangler facing 61 fraud charges. But for all the drama, Sebastian saw out 2020 with his ninth album, T.R.U.T.H, heading straight to No.1 on release in October and recommitting to his The Voice coach spot for the Seven reboot of the series. KMc

MUSICIAN TONES AND I THE Dance Monkey superstar continued to set new chart records around the world through 2020 with her unstoppable breakout song. Tones and I was the most streamed female artist on Spotify for the year, an achievement she celebrated by pointing out she didn't need a dozen American hitmakers to help her write a smash. During the pandemic shutdown, she devoted her energies to supporting emerging artists with That One Song contest which featured a new original song over 20 days. And then she released her own next big hit Fly Away in November, which was already well over 20 million streams before Christmas. KMc

THE INTERNATIONALS US PRESIDENT AND VICE PRESIDENT ELECT JOE BIDEN AND KAMALA HARRIS WHEN the polls closed on US election day in November, it looked like Donald Trump had defied the odds and would secure himself a second term over Democratic contender Joe Biden and his running mate, Kamala Harris. After winning the Democratic nomination following a bitterly contested primary campaign, Biden had chosen Harris as his pick for VP and the two set about to make history - he as the oldest president and she as the first African American vice-president. With the US in the grip of the deadly coronavirus pandemic, Biden-Harris launched a massive campaign to get people to vote; and vote early. For minorities that simple right can be a financial and logistical nightmare - voting is on a Tuesday and it is not a declared public holiday. As was expected the gloves came off during the campaign. There were accusations of sexual misconduct levelled at Biden - which he denied - there were claims levelled against Biden's son, Hunter, of using his father's name and allegedly promising access to make millions. As the count slowly continued through election night, it looked like the dirt might have stuck. But then the postal votes count started - the ones the Biden-Harris camp had urged people to use so they could have their say. Those glued to CNN or Fox News watched as Trump's big leads were slowly eroded and eventually overtaken and the history books again were rewritten. DM

OUTGOING US PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP SINCE taking office in January, 2017, Donald Trump's time as commander in chief has been a wild ride, but in 2020 the roller coaster seemed to fly off the rails. His failure to fully comprehend, and react to, the pandemic left the US positioned as one of the worst affected on the planet. In February he mocked the severity of the virus and in March said "no nation is more prepared or more resilient than the United States" before later saying he wouldn't be wearing a mask and stressing to people that CDC's advice to wear masks was voluntary. Things took an even stranger turn when he appeared to suggest disinfectant could be injected into people to knock it out. There have been more than 18 million cases and hundreds of thousands of deaths from COVID-19. The outgoing president also failed to address the rapidly growing Black Lives Matter movement that swept the nation in response to a growing number of deaths of black men and women at the hands of police officers, instead fuelling the fire by refusing to engage and preferring to label them violent thugs as a whole. Since losing the election to Joe Biden in November, Trump has cried foul from the rooftops, calling the election rigged and taking his fight to every court in the land to try to get votes discounted. To this day he continues to claim he won the vote in a landslide and refused to acknowledge the incoming chief. DM BRITISH PM BORIS JOHNSON BREXIT negotiations must have seemed a walk in the park for the British PM when he was hit with COVID crisis in early 2020. First his government stood accused of being too slow to react to the crisis as social distancing, school closures, stay-home orders and testing initiatives lagged behind those of many other countries. Then Johnson became a high-profile victim of the virus in late March, his worsening condition prompting his admission to intensive care. Better news came with the arrival of his son with partner Carrie Symons shortly after. The remainder of 2020 has unfolded in similar fashion for the British PM, with good news around vaccine development tempered by burgeoning case numbers and new restrictions for the festive season.

ACTOR CHADWICK BOSEMAN WHEN news broke in late August that Black Panther star Chadwick Boseman had died, there was an outpouring of shock and grief from all walks of life. Fellow actors, pillars of the business community and world leaders paid tribute. The announcement of his passing on Twitter was the most liked tweet in the platform's history. Boseman was not just an actor - he had become a beacon of hope to generations of fans across the globe and was proof that anything was possible if you put your heart and mind to it. It was revealed he had secretly been battling colon cancer since 2016. Initially assessed as stage III, the disease worsened to stage IV and he underwent numerous surgeries all while maintaining his busy filming schedule. He was best known for being a superhero on the big screen, but his most heroic actions were away from the cameras. Boseman worked tirelessly with black youth in encouraging and guiding them to reach heights they may not have thought possible. After the actor's death, former US president Barack Obama paid tribute to his work. "You could tell right away that he was blessed. To be young, gifted, and Black; to use that power to give them heroes to look up to; to do it all while in pain - what a use of his years," he said. DM

TV HOST ELLEN DEGENERES FOR years, Ellen DeGeneres and her eponymous daytime talk show were synonymous with fun and positivity. There was dancing, music, hilarious games and a guest list only Oprah could top. But on the inside, a molten toxicity was slowly bubbling towards the surface, one that erupted in the most spectacular fashion and threatened to ruin its star in the process. Cracks started to appear in March when comedian Kevin T Porter called DeGeneres "notoriously one of the meanest people alive" on Twitter and invited others to share their horror stories about the TV star. There was an avalanche of replies and some wild tales but given the forum it was impossible to tell if they were real. In May, a former bodyguard told of how the host was "cold" and "demeaning". Then in July, Buzzfeed News published a report in which current and past employees spoke of a toxic workplace culture, racism and harassment. There were reports of sexual misconduct by an executive producer who was fired along with two others in the wake of an investigation by Warner Bros. The show has restarted but there are reports ratings are down, sponsors have shied away and A-listers are staying away. DM

BASKETBALLER MICHAEL JORDAN THE legend surrounding the world's greatest basketball player has never really dissipated since his third retirement from the game almost 20 years ago. The basketball Jordan - and even the slightly cringe-worthy baseball Jordan - were alive and well. But with the release of the documentary series The Last Dance we got to see the psychology behind all that public-facing stuff. The Jordan name once again became the headline. Hours and hours of unseen footage was used to craft this 10-part series that focused on Jordan and the Chicago Bulls during the 1997-98 NBA season. This was intertwined with present-day interviews with the cigar-smoking star talking about what it was like to be one of the most competitive sportspeople alive. There was a lot of Jordan's brain in this series and while a lot of it wasn't particularly flattering, all of it was fascinating. DM

ACTORS JOHNNY DEPP AND AMBER HEARD THE who's who of Hollywood splash a lot of cash to keep their private lives - and their secrets - private. So, there was global interest in a case being played out inside a London courtroom involving one of the highest paid actors in Tinseltown. Johnny Depp was suing the UK's Sun newspaper for libel after it called him a "wife beater" in relation to alleged abuse against ex-wife Amber Heard. Claims of a troubled drug and alcohol fuelled lifestyle were put forward together with details about serious domestic abuse (that Depp denies) and violent fights between the former couple. There was destroyed property, severed finger tips and in one particularly foul piece of oversharing, claims of giant faeces deposits on a bed. The court ruled in favour of the newspaper which meant it found the accusations were 'substantially true'. The fallout was swift. Depp admitted he was asked to exit the Fantastic Beasts franchise after losing the case. His lawyers have signalled they will appeal the decision and there is another case in the US against Heard over an opinion piece she penned for The Washington Post. DM

ROYALS HARRY AND MEGHAN THIS time last year the royal spare and his actor wife should have been enjoying their first Christmas with their seven-month old son, Archie. But the festive spirit was not enough to deflect nasty criticism of Meghan, who was accused of photoshopping her face in the black and white photo. And that was just a taster of what was to come when the royal couple announced in early January that they would be relinquishing their roles as "senior" members of the royal family. Megxit instantly became one of THE words of 2020, inducted into the online edition of the Collins English Dictionary no less. "The decision that I have made for my wife and I to step back is not one I made lightly ... there really was no other option," Prince Harry would later stay. As commentators forensically examined who was at fault, the couple made their escape, first to Canada, then to California where they have since bought a home. Mega content deals with Netflix and Spotify followed as the couple forged ahead with a life plan that not even the most fanciful writers of The Crown could do justice to.
---
THERE is a huge problem at the Penrith Panthers over their million-dollar halfback Nathan Cleary and the fact no one wants to do anything about his recent behaviour.

Not only did he break COVID-19 protocols but then, lied and misled an NRL integrity unit inquiry. Over the weekend I tried to put questions to his father and coach, Ivan Cleary, via this text message: "Hi Ivan, I am trying to contact you to ask the following questions. "Will you remove Nathan from the leadership group?

"Are you disappointed that he misled the NRL integrity unit? "Have you spoken to Nathan about his leadership responsibilities? "Do you agree his actions are setting a poor example to your less experienced players?

"Is it harder having to handle a disciplinary issue like this one with your son, rather than another player?

"Do you agree with Brad Fittler in that it will harm his chances of playing Origin?

"I would appreciate a response at your earliest convenience. Thank you, Phil." There was no reply. He couldn't be bothered. No explanation required. Earlier I had spoken to chief executive Brian Fletcher. At least he picked up the phone.

However, he said any disciplinary action was not his responsibility: "We're waiting on the NRL to tidy it up and see where we land." I asked Fletcher if he would sack the 22-year-old halfback from the leadership group.

"That decision will be up to Ivan and the coaches," he said. "They'll make a recommendation and it will come back to the board to make the decision.

"At the end of the day he hasn't murdered anyone. He's normally got a sensible head on him, he interviews well and he's polite. He's just got to think better."Maybe Penrith, as a club, needs to think better too and stop the mollycoddling of their star players.
---
MARK O'Meley knows exactly how Queensland forward Tino Fa'asuamaleaui feels. "As coach, I had Payne Haas in the under-18s NSW side," O'Meley said. "We were doing some padwork and he ran straight over me." Little did the former Test, NSW, Canterbury and Roosters prop know, Haas, the fearless Blues bull, was merely trying to impress his hero.

"Ogre (O'Meley) was a warhorse and kept coming all day," Haas said when he asked who he looked up to ahead of his much-anticipated rematch with Fa'asuamaleaui tonight.

"Glenn Lazarus was also a freak. I always watch their old videos. "Those guys who paved the way for us forwards now, we (NSW forward pack) now have to leave the jersey in a better place than they did. '' All eyes will be on Haas and Fa'asuamaleaui after the two traded blows in Origin II.

O'Meley, the Blues COVID-19 officer in camp, smiled when asked if he expected more fireworks.

"It was good to see that Origin spirit, but there wasn't really much in it," said O'Meley, who played 10 games for NSW.

"It was just great to see two young guys going head to head. "It's Origin, it's a different beast.

"Obviously Tino's manager got under Payne's skin (with comments made pre-match) a bit and he reacted and that's how it works.

"Hopefully this time they concentrate on footy, but it obviously adds to the drama." O'Meley said he was proud that Haas looked up to him with a desire to maintain pride in the Blues jersey.

"I've coached Payne a few times now, through the juniors," O'Meley said. "He's a very nice kid who's been raised really respectfully. "We've got some good young players, Saf (Daniel Saifiti) is going really well and Payne is standing up and starting to see how great and how powerful he can be in the Origin arena which is different to NRL.

"He's always been a big powerful thing.

"He's a talent and he's just slowly opening doors, there's so much potential." The Suncorp Stadium decider will mark the biggest game of Haas' burgeoning career and the 20-year-old -acknowledges the Maroons will be a much better side on their home soil.

"It's hard to win up there, especially against Queensland," Haas said. "They always turn up, like we turn up here (Sydney). It is going to be a really tough game. "We can't try to fancy our way through them. If we weather the storm, I think we can get the job done."
---
A pandemic is out of control and wrecking lives and the economy because of a totalitarian regime's lies

The Chinese regime has through its ineptitude, dishonesty and recklessness unleashed a virus that will leave tens of thousands dead and likely cause a global recession.

China not only lied, destroyed evidence and allowed the virus to spread but it arrested whistleblower doctors who back in -December tried to warn the world about what was happening in Wuhan. At least one of the doctors arrested and accused of -"fabricating, disseminating and spreading rumours" has since died, reportedly from the disease.  Other domestic critics of China's response to the virus have 'vanished', including tycoon Ren Zhiqiang.

What worse is that the World Health Organisation opted to -uncritically believe the lies of Chinese authorities instead of properly investigating the outbreak.

As late as mid-January the WHO were disseminating dangerous Chinese propaganda posting: "Preliminary investigations conducted by the Chinese authorities have found no clear evidence of human-to-human transmission of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) identified in Wuhan, China." The WHO's complicity in this -catastrophe is extensive; at every turn they have praised China's response, pushed its preferred narratives while ignoring the regime's gross malfeasance. The initial Chinese cover-up included ordering the destruction of lab samples that established back in December the cause of unexplained viral infections in the Hubei province. How many lives would've been saved if China had listened to medical pro-fessionals instead of silencing them with threats?

A study by the University of Southampton suggests China could have prevented 95 per cent of coronavirus infections if it implemented tough measures three weeks earlier.

But the Chinese communist regime only took decisive action to contain the virus some four weeks after arresting doctors and other whistleblowers.

Meanwhile, the WHO refused to declare a pandemic until last week and as late as February it parroted China in criticising travel restrictions. When Donald Trump and Scott Morrison implemented travel bans against China in late January they did so against WHO advice.

Indeed WHO chief, Tedros Adha-nom Ghebreyesus, claimed that such travel bans would "unnecessarily -interfere with international travel and trade" and could "have the effect of -increasing fear and stigma, with little public health benefit". With a straight face he praised China's "transparency" while claiming the virus' spread was "minimal and slow".

We now know just how dead wrong he was with world renowned immunologists, including Dr Anthony Fauci, saying that the decision to close borders was crucial in slowing the spread of the disease.

How many other countries would've closed their borders and -restricted the outbreak if the WHO had encouraged bans instead of condemning them? How many would be spared loss and suffering if the WHO did its job instead of lecturing the world about not referring to the -Chinese origins of the disease?

If we want to stop the next pandemic it's important to hold China's feet to the fire and ensure they take meaningful measures to mitigate the risks of another global crisis. COVID-19 or Wuhan coronavirus is not the first pandemic to originate from a Chinese wet market. SARS and the Bird Flu also originated from wet markets where livestock, sea life and wild animals are kept and slaughtered in horrific conditions. The cruelty of wet markets, that sees exotic animals like pangolins and civets along with cats, dogs and wolf pups kept and killed in filthy conditions, is well -documented. But the markets and the wider wildlife meat trade are also incredibly dangerous in spreading -disease.

After the SARS epidemic of 2002 to 2004 China pledged to crackdown on illegal wildlife markets.

However, it wasn't long before -enforcement was relaxed; the country's Wildlife Protection Laws are considered a joke with massive loopholes and inconsistencies.

China's propaganda campaign hasn't been restricted to lying to the WHO and playing identity politics. The regime has systematically set about controlling the narrative and pushing back against any notion that it mishandled the crisis and is responsible for the unfolding mayhem across the globe.

At home China sent hundreds of propagandists, employed by the Chinese Communist Party's Central Propaganda Department, to Wuhan to "strengthen public opinion guidance". But the regime's efforts overseas are just as nefarious.

China spends billions on its foreign propaganda efforts. The disinformation warfare poses a threat to democracies and is crucial in advancing China's interests around the world.

The current message being pushed is that China's response to coronavirus was impeccable while the US is -responsible for the virus's spread.  China's deputy director of the Foreign Ministry Information Department, Lijian Zhao, even pushed the conspiracy theory that the Wuhan coronavirus actually originated in the US. That is why President Trump continues to refer to the virus's real origins despite the hysterical reaction from the media.

We expect paid Chinese propagandists to push the regime's narratives but what has been staggering is the -inordinate number of journalists in the West volunteering to be China's useful idiots, praising the country's -response and condemning any references to COVID-19's origins.

Much of the US media, who up until recently were referring to the Chinese or Wuhan coronavirus, now claim that Trump's use of the terms is racist.They are happy to carry water for a brutal regime that imprisons and -executes dissidents, locks up religious minorities and this week expelled American journalists if it damages Trump.
---
SOMEONE forgot to tell Channel 9 that last night's premiership relaunch match was the most-anticipated game of football in any code for years.

Footy-starved viewers switching on the Eels-Broncos match would no doubt have expected to hear the beautiful dulcet tones of Ray "Rabs" Warren, a household name and the voice of rugby league.

Not so. The great man watched from home.

Instead, Channel 9 used -little-known lower-grade caller Peter Psaltis to commentate out of Suncorp Stadium, a shock choice considering the magnitude of the game.

Rabs has a well-known dislike for aeroplanes plus the Queensland border is still closed, courtesy of COVID-19 and a stubborn premier.

Still, surely the great man could have called off the big screens from the station's Sydney studios.

We are talking about the first media man to be inducted into the NRL's Hall of Fame since our late and great mate Peter "Chippy" Frilingos.

Even Rabs' legendary sidekick, the great Phil "Gus" Gould, was not at Suncorp. Instead, he was on an expert panel in Sydney.

A spokesman for Channel 9 said Warren is working tonight instead on the Rabbitohs-Roosters blockbuster. However, Fox Sports produced the big guns last night when ace caller Andrew Voss was alongside Greg "Brandy" Alexander and Maroons Origin coach Kevvy Walters. Corey Parker was also on the sideline.
---
Whatever led a Paddington hotel to drop his name, the woke left's campaign to cancel the memory of the great James Cook shows just how ignorant they really are

Sorry, Captain Cook, you've been cut off. You don't have to go home, but you can't stay here - at least so long as "here" is Paddington's old Captain Cook Hotel.

On Thursday The Daily Telegraph reported that the 100-plus year old pub had undergone a name change, dropping the "Cook", and would henceforth be known simply as "The Captain".

Obviously, in these highly charged times when statues are being pulled down and textbooks rewritten, the decision raised a few eyebrows. Was this yet another example of cancel culture in action?

The pub's owner, Robby Moroney, told reporters the decision wasn't about politics, adding that they "won't be drawn" into the whole cancel -culture controversy.

And insofar as it goes, Sydney's drinkers will have to take the publican at his word. But it's hard not to suspect that, on some level, there might have been some concern that the old name was not only unfashionable, but dangerous.

Recall how just last month a Margaret River microbrewer that sold beer under the name Colonial was pulled from a chain of hipster bottle shops because, in the words of the owners, "words have power (and) 'Colonial' is still a problematic word that speaks to a broader history of -colonialism and colonisation that has caused irreversible harm to the First Nations people in Australia and -Indigenous populations around the world".

As many noted at the time the -bottle shops' owners haven't given up selling alcohol, which has also caused untold harm to Indigenous populations around the world, but that's another story.

The point is, Captain James Cook has been, with woke folk, on the nose for some time.

And it's not hard to imagine any small businessperson deciding to get rid of the lightening rod.

In May, Victoria's deputy chief health officer took a break from -developing that state's world-leading hotel quarantine plans - just kidding - to tweet, with regard to the pandemic: "Sudden arrival of an invader from another land, decimating populations, creating terror. Forces the population to make enormous sacrifices & completely change how they live in order to survive. COVID-19 or Cook 1770?" A couple of weeks ago, a Greens staffer was convicted of vandalising the Captain Cook monument in Hyde Park, Sydney.

Various commemorations of the 250th anniversary of Cook's landing this year have been met with silence, sneers, and derision - a far cry from the national celebration that gripped Australia in 1970, the bicentennial of the event.

It's a wonder that we're even still allowed to "have a Captain Cook" or even go home to "cook dinner".

But all of this outrage over Cook is born of ignorance. As outrage usually is. Yes, to the modern left, the great 18th century scientist and explorer was not a man of great achievement, but the man who paved the way for what they consider the great disaster that was the European settlement of Australia.

But no matter what tragedies may have occurred in the early life of our nation, Cook is hardly to blame.

This is not to say that efforts by the woke folk to scrub the names of early settlers like Lachlan Macquarie and Arthur Philip from the public eye are more worthwhile or legitimate. They're not.

But if the grievance grifters are looking for someone from our early modern history to go after, Cook ain't the guy.

If anything, Cook is exactly the sort of person the left might once have celebrated.

A working-class boy of humble -origins, through his own intelligence and hard work Cook became perhaps the greatest navigator of his age.

Unlike some pirate or conquistador, the only treasure he sought was knowledge - and perhaps some scientific samples to bring back home as well.

No hard driving Captain Bligh, Cook was a shrewd leader who took care of his men - and knew what made them tick.

In one legendary account, Cook tried to get his men to eat sauerkraut to prevent scurvy. They baulked at the idea, until he made it a status -symbol by only serving it in his ship's Officers' Mess.

Nor did he come to Australia to conquer the local population. One famous meeting in July 1770 between Cook and the local Guugu Yimidhirr people of north Queensland led to a negotiation over the -taking of turtles - and has been called by some Australia's first act of reconciliation.

As J.C. Beaglehole, the biographer who first edited Cook's journals noted, the great man was many things, but he was also a man of "no politics" and "no religion".

Which may, ultimately, be more upsetting - triggering, even - to the cancellers than anything else Cook did.

For the hyper-woke left that is so keen to scrub the world of any -upsetting reminders of the past and reset the clock to Year Zero, everything is political.

Think of how progressives look at even the most mundane aspects of your personal life through a political lens - who does the dishes, do you drive to work or take public transport - and you see how every action must be geared to serve their revolution.

And witness how so many of the rituals of woke culture mimic the rites of religion, from the original sin of "privilege" to the symbolic kneeling and even washing of feet we saw in the US during the George Floyd protests.

Being beyond, or above, all that - as Cook was - is perhaps the most unforgivable sin, to them, of all.

For the rest of us who are able to look at the past honestly and -squarely, Cook deserves to be honoured, perhaps with a nice cold beer in the pub 250 years after he first hit the eastern seaboard. I wonder if the Captain serves -Colonial?
---
But grand final lockout looming

THE NRL is resigned to a grand final with no crowd.

Amid the crazy ideas being offered to get the NRL season going again - and they run from relocating the entire NRL to the Cook Islands to a late bid yesterday from Hamilton Island, where high-falutin' folks like Matty Johns go to drink daiquiris - a grand final with no crowd might be the craziest idea yet to get our heads around.

But a premiership with nobody to celebrate in front of is the new reality. Anything more is a hope, at best.

It comes as the NRL gets serious about putting players into a bubble, and Sydney's Olympic precinct is heavily favoured.

The best-case scenario to see out the season appears a relaxing of laws similar to round two when the competition went ahead inside empty stadiums. The lone positive is that players will live at home.

The NRL is being inundated with ideas. Fans who have stumbled upon The Solution, hotels and resorts looking for cheap publicity, are all taking a stab at providing the answer.

But each solution provides a problem. And each new day brings a narrowing of options.

The two-conference system, for instance, with half the teams at the Olympic precinct and the other half on the Gold Coast, or the Tangalooma Island resort, is almost certainly doomed.

Different jurisdictions have different rules in place.

Queensland has laws in place that insist anybody crossing into Queensland, like players returning from a game, must undergo a 14-day quarantine.

That means even in a two-conference system players will almost certainly have to be in the same state. That tips the future in favour of NSW.

While country towns like Gladstone have been suggested as possible bubbles given their isolation, the proximity of the teams being in Sydney to St Vincent's Hospital, where tests for COVID-19 can be turned around in hours, instead of days like it would take from country Queensland, makes Sydney more likely.

All remain up for debate when the innovation committee meets tomorrow. Much remains uncertain.

There might come a resolution ready to present to the Australia Rugby League -Commission for consideration or there might be a need for one more meeting before a resolution is ready.

Certainly plenty of work has already been done.

The crowdless grand final is one of a number of realities the NRL's new innovation committee will face tomorrow.

Led by Wayne Pearce, the committee is also expected to strongly consider moving players into quarantine early next month ahead of a May 28 resumption.

The players will enter the quarantine in stages so as not to overwhelm the testing process. Four hundred players over a weekend is too many.

The staged arrivals is the lone reason an Origin series to kick off the new-look season is being considered.

Origin would allow football to be played while teams gradually enter quarantine, ready to play by the time the series is over. There is not another good reason linked to it, but it might be enough.

Pearce, NRL head of football Graham Annesley and International Rugby League deputy chairman Troy Grant have been investigating bio-security and the business plan around restarting the -competition.

Grant, along with ARL Commission chairman Peter V'landys, has also been speaking to the government about restarting the season.

Raiders chief executive Don Furner is looking at the logistics of available venues and how to move the players in and out. Clint Newton is -liaising with players.

NRL chief operating officer Andrew Abdo is looking at the commercial side, primarily the structure of the draw. One complete round and a conference system are some of the alternatives.

Sydney Roosters coach Trent Robinson is liaising with coaches about lead-in times and trials. Some clubs, since gone quiet, initially suggested they needed as many as six weeks to get players ready.

This is a good example of when coaches should be ignored. The priority is to get the competition operating as quickly as possible.

The one challenge yet to be dealt with is how the players cope with isolation and, -primarily, for how long.

While boredom is making us all stupid at the moment it will be a fresh burden imposed on the players once they are placed in the bubble.

It is not a burden they should be asked to carry for too long. Given the downward trend of new infections it's hoped that by August enough restrictions will have been lifted to allow the players to return home and then carry on the season under the same lim-itations as there were for round two.

The NRL knows it will bring fresh argument but every step forward has been a battle so far.

Full rounds, with no crowds, and a season in which every team plays each other once is the preferred option.Origin is fitted in, a full eight-team finals series goes ahead, and the grand final is played with no crowd.
---
PETER V'landys is confident the NRL Premiership will not be derailed by a COVID-19 resurgence but the game has contingency plans in place to -ensure the show can go on.

ARLC chairman V'landys and the NRL are closely monitoring the coronavirus situation in NSW as Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk threatens to declare more Sydney hot spots and close the state's border again.

The NRL has already returned to stricter biosecurity protocols following a spike in NSW cases and the second surge in Victoria has put the league on high alert.

Palaszczuk has already declared a number of regions in Sydney as COVID hot spots and blocked people from those areas from entering Queensland.

Players from the hot spots are required to undergo extra testing before entering Queensland and NRL teams that travel to Sydney will be closely monitored upon returning home.

The Melbourne Storm, now based on the Sunshine Coast, are facing six straight weeks of quarantine at their hotel base following games in Sydney.

The NRL's 'Project Apollo' -committee has canvassed a number of worst-case scenario options which -include shifting all teams to NSW or Queensland if the virus spreads -further.

Only seven new positive cases were recorded in NSW on Friday and V'landys said he was confident the NRL could continue through a -potential outbreak.

"We have got to stay a step ahead of the virus at all times," he said. "We're trying to stay balanced and a step ahead. If we get through this, that will be why.

"As it stands today, I'm very confident (of the season continuing). But as I said back in March, things can change in 24 hours.

"It's one of those things that is unpredictable. Nothing surprises me." The NRL is currently in Round 11 of a 20-round season which will be followed by four weeks of finals and then a three-game State of Origin series.

The Apollo committee meets weekly to discuss a range of issues the game is facing and creating contingency plans has been part of that.

V'landys praised the NSW and Queensland governments and said he hoped to relax protocols for NRL players in the coming weeks if the situation remained stable.

"That was precautionary because we didn't know how bad the Victorian situation was, there was too much uncertainty because of how many Victorians came over the border," he said.

"Until that uncertainty is eradicated we had to go back to our protocols. "We want minimal risk. We're going to be disciplined. That's why we introduced the protocols again.

"In the next two weeks we might be able to relax the protocols again after we review it. The next two weeks will determine if NSW has basically -eradicated the virus again. We 99 per cent eradicated it (in NSW) and then the Victorian ones came in and infected us again. Now we've got to eradicate it again.

"The way the NSW government is performing at the moment has been eradicating it because they've been able to trace every case. Queensland has been great, they are not overreacting which is a good thing. "With this virus anything can happen and it's a day-to-day proposition. At the moment if it stays like this I'm confident we will see the season out under the current conditions."
---
FOOTY'S finally back and so are the fans - all 300 million of them watching in loungerooms around the world.

In what will be a watershed moment for rugby league, the NRL's stunning eight-game return over the next four days is set to be watched by a -record global television audience of 300 million sport-starved people in what is expected to be the largest TV ratings for a single round in the sport's 112-year history.

Industry insiders predict around 30 to 40 million people around the world would tune in to each bone-rattling match over the next four days as rugby league becomes the first football code in the -English-speaking world to -return to the playing fields and television.

NRL matches will be shown in more than 70 countries, including the US, France, Britain, Papua New Guinea and Uganda.

At 7.50pm tonight when Brisbane and Parramatta kick off at Suncorp Stadium, rugby league will become just the third major sporting league in the world, along with football's K League in South Korea and Germany's Bundesliga, to resume post COVID-19.

Matches will also be shown in such far-flung countries as Nauru, Angola and The Netherlands.

Some countries have aired NRL games in recent years but matches have already been promoted heavily this week.

The increase in viewership could not be accurately predicted but insiders believe it could be by as much as 40 to 50 per cent.

"There's certainly a unique opportunity to attract new fans to our game globally," said acting NRL CEO Andrew Abdo.

"While it has been the loyalty of our fans here at home that has been driving us to resume the season, we will be one of only a few live sports around the world that will be playing in June and July.

"We know fans are craving live sport so we're excited about the global audience we could attract with the resumption of the competition and the exposure that will bring to our corporate partners.

"We are also expecting a strong take-up of the Watch NRL app which allows fans to stream games live throughout the world. It's a credit to our chairman Peter V'landys and the commission for their unwavering commitment to bring the game back on May 28." NRL officials hope to gain a slice of the massive US sports market during the NFL and NBA's shutdowns and have already seen a spike in media interest A story on forbes.com this week was headlined: "Americans, this is why the NRL should be your new favourite sport".

"Rugby league is the lesser-known but infinitely superior form of rugby, and if you like your sport high-octane, occasionally violent, endlessly authentic and frequently spectacular, then you need to tune in this Thursday for the National Rugby League (NRL)," the story read.

"Rugby league is like watching the NFL, except after every down they immediately have to get up and do it again, with no break, and nobody wears padding." Ratings in coronavirus-hit England are also expected to spike significantly with Super League yet to recommence.

"Around 80 to 90 million people would have access to the games in America and Europe, maybe more," a TV source said. "From that you have to ask yourself how many would watch it.

"Many may not understand the game but they are craving live sport around the world right now.

"Australians are watching the Bundesliga. Why? Because it's the only live sport being shown. I would imagine around 30 to 40 million people would watch each game for longer than 15 minutes. That would be equivalent to watching one quarter of an NFL match.

"Way back in 2011, State of Origin and the NRL grand final reached 40 million households in the US and 48 million through Europe.

"They might not come back when their preferred sport returns but, this weekend, they will be watching." The NRL has jumped back first ahead of the AFL and is the first sport to be played since March 23.

Despite the hype, Nine and Fox are reluctant to predict their NRL ratings in Australia for this round for fear they may fall short.

While fans will tune in, broadcasters will still have a challenge ahead to create the game-day atmosphere without supporters in the stands.

Sydney Roosters coach Trent Robinson said ravenous sports fans around the world would tune into rugby league.

"There has been a lot of work from the NRL to get back on and we want to represent our game well in some clear air space around the world," said Robinson.

"There has been some interest around rugby league from friends who live overseas. It will be good to get our game back on represented the right way. It's great to be back.

"We want to represent rugby league and there's no better game for us than Friday night's match against Souths to restart the season. Former NSW skipper and coach Laurie Daley knows the NRL cannot miss a wonderful opportunity: "This is a great chance to showcase our game to so many countries. We have known how great our game has been for years but now it's time for others to find out."
---
THE COVID FILES Chinese scientists linked to virus probe worked in Australia

TWO Chinese scientists - who Western intelligence agencies are looking into as part of their probe into the origins of the global coronavirus contagion - studied live bats in Australia in research jointly funded by the Australian and Chinese governments. An investigation by The Daily Telegraph can reveal the Five Eyes intelligence agencies of Australia, Canada, NZ, UK and US, are understood to be looking closely at the work of a senior scientist at the Wuhan Institute of Virology, Peng Zhou, and fellow scientist Shi Zhengli, as they examine whether COVID-19 originated from a wet market or whether the naturally-occurring virus may have been inadvertently released from a level four laboratory in Wuhan.FULL REPORT PAGES 2-3


---
Cam, it's Eels who were hard done by So Cameron Smith thinks that he was hard done by, with the NRL coming down on the Storm for salary cap breaches of almost $3.8m over five years (You're wrong Cam, 16/11).

He should get over it and move on … preferably out of the game. And if he thinks he's hard done by, what about Parramatta? The NRL should award the 2009 premiership to them because they were beaten by a team that was proven to be cheating and had the title (rightly) stripped from them.

Not to mention the endorsements that Parramatta would have received for being premier.

Cameron's autobiography (The Storm Within) is definitely something I will not have on my Christmas list.

G. Evans, Kaleen, ACT

What if both sides of politics have it wrong?

A tale of politicians lecturing, not listening?

In Monday's Telegraph … on the one hand BlueScope Steel is pouring money in to support the NSW government's wind, solar and battery fantasies (Big Blue boost to green energy, 16/11) while Hunter Valley voters are deserting the Labor Party in droves due to Anthony Albanese's climate policy (Workers revolt, 16/11).

Surely there is a disconnect here? NSW Liberal Energy Minister Matt Kean is striving for net zero emissions - to meet a Labor/Greens climate agenda; while Labor's Joel Fitzgibbon could lose his seat for Labor unless the ALP abandons its climate obsession?

Perhaps, both parties have it wrong on climate and the emissions obsession? Bob Partington, Wahroonga

Fitz is right fit for workers Joel Fitzgibbon is right to consider the workers in his electorate (Labor must not ignore blast from Fitzgibbon, 16/11).

He seems to be the only one in the Labor Party that realises that unless they stop aligning themselves with the Greens and placing too much emphasis on climate change, political correctness etc. they will be left in the wilderness.

Blue-collar workers want jobs, and manufacturing, not all the other garbage. Tony, Ryde

Pollies have lost their way The ALP hasn't genuinely represented workers for at least a generation, possibly much longer (Workers revolt, 16/11).

The new political class is consumed by party intrigues and power struggles that leave little time to actually connect with those outside of their bubble.

There is much effort put into theorising and analysing demographics to win votes without actually coming into contact with many individuals who have not directly involved themselves in the political process.

The closest most pollies come into contact with a fluoro vest is when they put on their pristine version for the cameras before scurrying back to the safety of their white cars.

Unfortunately, the Liberals are no better, appearing hellbent on following the ALP down the same woke rabbit hole and having quiet Australia serve their chosen political gods, whether they want to or not.

Bruce Collison, Banks, ACT

Just a steam-age dreamer There's no great need to take notice of Joel Fitzgibbon and his claims about defending the jobs and future of coal miners (Labor must not ignore blast from Fitzgibbon, 16/11).

If he really meant any of it, he'd be jumping up and down with demands that we go back to steam trains. And heating our houses with coal. And cooking on coal-fuelled stoves. And changing our cars to coal-fuelled steam power.

Our coal-loving Prime Minister Scott Morrison would be backing him up, too. But neither of them has said a word on the matter. Why not? Don't they want to win seats in Queensland?

GTW Agnew, Coopers Plains, Qld

Honouring elite bunch Great news for NSW Police detectives to be issued with an identification badge exclusively for them (Badge for NSW's finest, 16/11).

Detectives are an elite bunch with many crime squads created to tackle the ever-increasing violations and offences in our society.

So, 200 detective positions each year seems a small amount of man/womanpower to add to the current numbers of plain-clothed officers. Not taking away from the general duties officers, who are first responders at a road accident or crime scene. They all do a wonderful job in keeping us safe.

To the new detective graduates awaiting their promotions, treat your "new badge" as you have the one issued to you when you joined the constabulary.

Gloria Velleley, Belrose

Badge won't catch crooks Wow. We should all be jumping for joy, our police detectives now have a new badge (Badge for NSW finest, 16/11).

This, I'm sure, is going to markedly improve crime solving and putting the crooks behind bars! I just hope I never have to see one.

John George, Terrigal

Adelaide cluster a warning As the crowds start to gather for Christmas and New Year parties, to me many people seem to be living in a fool's paradise thinking COVID-19 has disappeared from Australian shores with no new cases and many want the safety procedures ended.

But then 17 new cases just turned up in Adelaide (Three states shut borders to SA as COVID cluster jumps to 17 - Online, 16/11).

It seems hard for people to understand that you cannot defeat this killer disease until a fully successful vaccine is found, and even then it could be years before everyone in the world is safe to travel.

Robert Livingstone, Alexandria

Resetting vocabulary Regarding the report in Monday's The Daily Telegraph on a new regional free trade deal (Trade deal to ease tension with China, 16/11) … the first paragraph begins with "Australia is hoping to reset its embattled trade relationship with China".

Readers might want to remember that word "reset" because they are going to be hearing it a lot more in 2021.

"The Great Reset" is the major theme of the next World Economic Forum to be held in January.

B Thompson, Cowra

Briefly … If Donald Trump is too proud to concede he should just resign, Vice President Mike Pence can become President of USA and then he can concede. But just go, please.

Sam Saidden, Parramatta "" " While I agree with the minor alteration to the national anthem, why don't we consider the complete replacement with the Seekers' beautiful I Am Australian. Surely this ticks all the boxes.

Chris Quinn, Kings Langley "" " How dare the federal government sign up to a trade agreement with China (Trade deal to ease tension with China, 16/11). And, shame on the other 13 countries.

Paul Clancy, Kogarah "" " Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk's COVID-eradicating magic wand used so effectively to clear Suncorp Stadium of the dreaded virus so State of Origin can be played before a capacity crowd must be an outstanding piece of equipment. I look forward to this same wand being used to eradicate the $100-plus billion state debt.

Jack Jackson, Burleigh Heads "" " What does Albo expect? Of course, the Hunter Valley has deserted the ALP but still he won't listen to Joel Fitzgibbon (Workers revolt, 16/11). Mark Butler is Albo's best weapon if he wants to head for four election losses in a row with his ridiculous climate change policy.

Dazza, Singleton "" " The Coalition have introduced JobKeeper, JobSeeker and JobMaker. With their climate and energy plans it looks like the ALP is planning JobKiller. I expect it will work a treat.

Doug Hurst, Chapman, ACT

HAVE YOUR SAYMAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
Brits upset Beijing with Uyghur report AUSTRALIA is not the only country being targeted by China's "wolf warrior diplomats", despite taking the lead on standing up to Beijing over issues including the coronavirus inquiry and human rights abuses against the Uyghur people.

The Australian Strategic Policy Institute has released a report titled "Trigger Warning", suggesting the Chinese Communist Party is running a "co-ordinated information campaign" to attack UK public broadcaster the BBC after it aired revelations of the systemic sexual assault of female prisoners in China's Uyghur internment camps.

"CCP diplomatic accounts, Chinese state media, pro-CCP influencers and patriotic trolls on Silicon Valley's social media networks are spreading messages and narratives that seek to undermine critical reporting by international media," the report said.

The report comes just days after revelations in a speech given in Canberra by senior Chinese diplomat Wang Xining complaining about the Australian media and threatening those who "choose to make enemies" with Beijing will be "cast aside by history".

Clive Hamilton, Charles Sturt University academic and author of Hidden Hand: Exposing How the Chinese Communist Party is Reshaping the World, said that the report further underlined the nature of the regime and its behaviour.

"China under Xi Jinping has taken bullying to the next level; any nation that stands up to Beijing now gets the treatment," he said.

"We are now in a fight for the future of democracy.

"If the West loses, we will end up doing Beijing's bidding on everything." The report also found strong connections between Chinese troll accounts on -social media that amplified COVID-19 origin conspiracy theories and those that attacked the British broadcaster.

According to the ASPI, of the 500 pro-China Twitter -accounts that had previously pushed the idea the coronavirus was actually invented in an American biowarfare lab, some 110 of them "shifted to criticise the BBC, repeating the same narratives pushed by Chinese diplomats and state media".

Nationals Senator Matt Canavan has lashed out at China."While the West is consumed by whether Dr Seuss is racist, China is cancelling anyone who dares criticise them," Mr Canavan said.

"The BBC's groundbreaking first hand accounts of the genocide that is occurring in Xinjiang reveals the moral bankruptcy of the Chinese Communist Party.

"The CCP's attempt to cancel the BBC should encourage all the more people to read the BBC's reports and push back against China's appalling treatment of the Uyghur people." The report warns that Western nations will need to be on guard against the CCP's "propaganda and disinformation apparatus".

TIM BLAIR PAGE 13 EDITORIAL PAGE 18
---
CHINESE Ambassador Cheng Jingye's threat of a consumer boycott of Australia will prove hollow, the wine industry says. But the seafood sector is worried.

As the Morrison government pressed for an international inquiry into the origins of COVID-19, Mr Cheng this week warned that "maybe the ordinary people will say 'Why should we drink Australian wine? Eat Australian beef?'." Wine and Grape Australia head Tony Battaglene said demand was already increasing and there was likely to be no fallout: "I think there is the potential for consumers to be influenced by that type of media, particularly in China. But I don't think it has happened in this instance." The only time he could recall a downturn linked to a political spat was in 2018 when there were accusations of Chinese spying. Australia's wine exports to China are worth $1.3 billion a year.But Seafood Industry Australia chairwoman Veronica Papacosta is concerned: "We think there is a high chance of an impact which we would not like to see." She said the abalone industry would be hit hardest because of its heavy reliance on the China market.
---
Step up in the region or China will take over, intel boss warns

THE former intelligence chief to the US Navy's -Pacific Fleet has called on the Australian government to "aggressively" reach out to our Pacific Island neighbours with aid packages to counter the influence of China in the region.

Captain Jim Fanell (pictured) said failure to do so means it is "just a matter of time before the nations of the South Pacific begin to see PLA navy warships and air force military aircraft plying their waters and flying across their airways".

His warning comes as analysts indicate Kiribati's Christmas Island Pacific atoll 2000km south of -Hawaii could be the next target for China to try and build a military base.

Captain Fanell said the re-election of Kiribati president Taneti Maamau just months after he ditched support of Taiwan in favour of Beijing "is an indicator of the growing effectiveness of the PRC's strategic influencing campaign across the South Pacific".

"It seems likely that Beijing will provide Kiribati huge amounts of money that are contingent upon -allowing the People's Republic of China to have greater access and exclusionary rights in this tiny atoll nation," he said.

China is now the third largest supplier of cash in the region - behind Australia and New Zealand.

Australian money comes in the form of aid whereas China's largely comes in the form of loans for big infrastructure projects that are then built by Chinese -companies.

Chinese loans have been labelled debt-trap diplomacy and for some nations - such as Tonga - more than half the country's debt is owed to China.

It proved a trap for Sri Lanka two years ago when it was forced to hand China control of a Chinese built port on a 99-year lease to pay off a $14 billion debt.

"Over the past three years, scores of PRC government officials have been travelling Oceania to offer infrastructure deals and it now appears their work is beginning to pay off," Captain Fanell said.

In 2017 China released a paper called Vision for Maritime Cooperation under the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) which outlined its plan to expand influence into the Pacific through big civilian infrastructure programs.

Captain Fanell said the building of civilian ports, such as an 800m quay in Vanuatu, could be paving the way for the Chinese navy in the future. "Many questioned the necessity for such a large wharf given Vanuatu's economic circumstances, but from a military perspective it would appear that this dock would allow PLA navy warships a perfect harbour in the future," he said.

Jonathan Pryke, the Lowy Institute's Pacific Islands -expert, said the port on Kiribati's Christmas Island atoll "would be of clear strategic benefit to China".

Kiribati has a population of just 110,000 spread over 33 islands as part of an exclusive economic zone larger than India and a host of problems including non-communicative diseases and rising sea levels that would benefit from Chinese aid.

"Australia and its allies will need to be vigilant that this assistance doesn't come with some kind of concession to give China a strategic foothold," Mr Pryke said.

China has already tried to establish bases in the Pacific. Just days after the Solomon Islands ditched support for Taiwan in favour of Beijing last year, a Chinese company attempted to lease all of Tulagi Island with its perfect deepwater harbour. That was rejected as unlawful by the courts.

Captain Fannell warned a string of Chinese bases across the Pacific would -profoundly affect Australia's strategic and defence -thinking.

"The danger for Australia is that Beijing will use their new BRI partnerships to further manipulate the international order in its favour and thus empower it to take punitive actions against Australia if it does not kowtow to the Chinese Communist Party's demands," he said.

"Australia has just witnessed this over the issue of Prime Minister Morrison's legitimate inquiry into the origins of the coronavirus. The PRC not only refused to accept such a query, but went one step further and penalised Australia for even asking the question." Captain Fanell said Australia needed to "aggressively" reach out to Pacific nations to offer aid while at the same time talking to "Washington, Tokyo and Taipei to offer comprehensive solutions to these -nations problems." The first step should be to help Kiribati, in the heart of the world's largest tuna belt, to build a viable fishing -industry before China stepped in to do that instead.

A Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade spokesman said Australia was pumping a record $1.4 billion a year into the Pacific as part of Pacific Step-up, which had "pivoted our development assistance to prioritise what Pacific nations need most in the context of COVID-19.

"We welcome commitments from others that support sustainable development and respond to the priorities of our region," the spokesman said.

"The Australian Government looks forward to continuing to work closely with Kiribati President Taneti Maamau, following his -re-election." The Chinese consulate did not respond to requests for comment.
---
FINANCE The way we source electricity long term needs to change, writes Lisa Hughes and Robyn Willis

Thousands of NSW households will face eye-watering energy bills this winter as the impact of COVID-19 sinks in.

Since the start of the pandemic, energy usage across the country has increased by 105 per cent, according to data from Natural Solar, Australia's largest installer of solar panels and batteries, with average daily energy consumption rocketing to 33.9kw, compared with 16.5kw at the same time last year.

As a result, household energy bills for the past quarter could more than double, with the average household paying $800, up from $406.75. Those households with higher than average power usage can expect bills of up to $1800 a quarter.

Natural Solar chief executive Chris Williams says during COVID-19, Australians got a taste of what it is like to work and study from home, which has created a generational shift in the way we use electricity.

"We envisage the trend for higher usage is going to continue, and while it may be at a lesser rate than during COVID-19, even a 30 or 40 per cent rise will have a significant impact on household bills," Williams says.

While most Australian families will be hit hard by the increases, he says there were some households set to make it through the "COVID Quarter" unscathed.

Homeowners using solar power, combined with batteries to store unused power, have less reliance on the grid and a greater chance of reducing or eliminating their electricity bills.

For Kripa Amour, who in January moved into a four-bedroom Smart townhome in the Essentia development at Norwest with her two teenagers, it was a relief knowing her electricity bill was completely covered.

"The developers had a deal to provide the solar so that we would have one year of electricity paid for us, which was a huge advantage," she says. "It means that when you turn the heater on at night, you don't have to think twice about it." Solar panels were already installed by Natural Solar when Kripa moved in, which saved her the hassle now - and will save her money later.

"It wasn't the turning point (in my decision to buy) but it was one of the things I liked about moving here," she says. "There is battery storage and we have an app so we can see how much we use." The pandemic, and subsequent isolation measures, have focused attention on her family's electricity use more than ever.

"It's the heating and the lighting that adds up - every moment we are using electricity," she says. "Having the solar panels is a huge advantage for us." With the increased frequency of natural disasters, such as the recent bushfires and floods, followed by the coronavirus pandemic, Williams says that there has been a general shift in people wanting self-sufficiency when it comes to powering their homes.

Improvements in technology had made power sources like solar and battery storage more affordable, with many saving money almost immediately.

"If the use of solar power reduces energy bills by even 10 per cent and bills rise by 3 or 4 per cent per annum, it makes absolute sense," Williams says.

Meanwhile, for those who have been affected by COVID-19, some energy companies are trying to help customers through the period of "bill shock".

Paul Duboudin, senior external affairs manager at Origin, said the energy company would be providing tailored support, including payment extensions, payment plans or referrals, for those customers affected by COVID-19.

"We have paused late payment fees and are not disconnecting or default-listing any customers in financial distress until at least July 31," he says.

More: naturalsolar.com.au; originenergycom.au

MONEY SAVERS * Turn appliances off at the power point when they are not in use. Standby power can cost you $100 a year.

* Install insulation in your ceilings and walls. Heating a fully insulated home can save you between 40 and 50 per cent compared with a noninsulated home. * Track your energy use with an app. You will see where you're using the most energy, so you can drive your costs down. Try Wattcost or Powerpal, which are both Aussie start-ups.
---
Cordner says players ready for isolation KANGAROOS stars Boyd Cordner and Cameron Murray have thrown their heavyweight support behind Project Apollo, convinced rugby league's biggest names will lockdown immediately if it means resurrecting the code.

With ARLC chairman Peter V'landys wanting to restart the NRL season by June, both Cordner and Murray have told The Saturday Telegraph that Australian Test players will do "whatever it takes" to assist in the bold comeback plan.

Already, the newly-formed NRL innovation committee has been tasked with reviving the competition within the next eight weeks, even if it means putting all 16 clubs into quarantine.

Another option is restarting with a State of Origin series, with potential lockdown zones including Sydney Olympic Park, the Queensland town of Gladstone, or even a remote -island in the Pacific Ocean.

CONTINUED PAGE 93 FROM BACK PAGE Asked about going into lockdown so that rugby league could restart during the COVID-19 pandemic, Cordner said: "As players, we need to do whatever it takes. And if going into isolation is required by the game to get things started again, I'm sure that's what we'll do.

"We've seen what the Warriors were prepared to do, and then what they did over a couple of weeks to keep the NRL running. And as rugby league players, this is what we do … we want to play." While the Roosters' superstar added that isolating for weeks, and potentially months, would be difficult for some NRL players - "especially those with large families" - he stressed the sacrifice would be worth it.

"Obviously a lot of guys are at different stages in their lives," Cordner said. "Some are young, single and would have no problem going into isolation. Others though, have big families and obviously it's going to be a lot more difficult for them. But at the same time, I think every player realises we wouldn't have the lives we do without rugby league. So you have to do everything possible to get back to the game." South Sydney star Murray agreed.

"Personally, I'm happy to do whatever it takes to start playing again," he said. "As long as it can be done in a safe environment that's approved by health professionals, I'm ready to go.

"Not only from a selfish point of view, because I'd love to be playing again, but also for the wider community. I think this issue is far bigger than just footballers getting paid again.

"Rugby league is an important part of Australian culture and I'll do whatever I can to get it going again." Currently, an eight-member committee led by ARL commissioner Wayne Pearce is working out ways to construct an environment where the NRL competition can resume while still ensuring the safety of its players.

Dubbed "Project Apollo", the push involves a range of scenarios that include having all 16 clubs together in quarantine, having teams separated into conferences or even isolating clubs across NSW and Queensland.Asked when he thought the NRL season would resume, and how it might look, Cordner said: "Right now, that's a hard one to answer. Will we play a full season? I don't know. I'd like to think there's a chance but I'm guessing it will more likely be a modified competition."
---
SOMEWHERE hidden away in Port Kembla is Hill 60.

An old World War II military stronghold which rises some 70m above sea level in a patchwork of ageing gun batteries, tunnels and one unthinkably steep bitumen road.

Years ago, it was the Illawarra Steelers' proving ground.

With late, great coach Graham Murray - who spent five years leading the club in the 90s - particularly fond of sending his scarlet and white troops up said hill every pre-season.

Yet today?

It belongs to Alex Volkanovski.

The Australian UFC champion who has adapted his own program from that forged by the likes of Steelers greats Rod Wishart, Paul McGregor, John Simon and Neil Piccinelli.

"And now that I'm likely headed for some private island," Volkanovski said this week, "there's going to be a lot more climbing".

While most of world sport remains in lockdown, Australia's UFC featherweight champ is quietly running up hills in preparation for a title defence he knows nothing about.

Only that it's coming.

Especially given this past week, UFC president Dana White has announced UFC 249 for May 10 (AEST), three events for that week, and also suggested his hyped 'Fight Island' project will be operational for international athletes by June.

Enter Volkanovski.

After claiming the UFC strap from Hawaiian Max Holloway in December, this 31-year-old Wollongong fighter was firming for a title rematch at UFC 250 in Perth, this June.

However with the COVID-19 outbreak cancelling that card, Volkanovski is now gunning to lead off on Fight Island, complete with Octagon on the beach.

Which is why, with NSW in lockdown, and his Freestyle Fighting Gym shuttered, Volkanovski has started on the most unique training camp of his fight career.

Each morning, the UFC champ connects via zoom with his strength and conditioning coach Chrisy Jaffrey, who doubles as an exercise physiologist at the BaiMed Performance Centre.

Located just outside Wollongong, BaiMed's staff have not only worked with the NSW Origin side, but also NRL premiership teams from St George Illawarra and Cronulla.

Elsewhere, Matildas striker Caitlin Foord also employs the specialist training team, as did US basketball prodigy LaMelo Ball when Down Under with the Illawarra Hawks.

So with Jaffrey providing instruction, Volkanovski does weights in his lounge room, conditioning in the backyard and, increasingly, arduous solo sessions up Hill 60.

"We use the hills around Port Kembla to work on aerobic power," Jaffrey explained. "It's actually based off the old Steelers program.

"Near the top of Hill 60, it also becomes about pushing the body and mind to its limits. Really driving the heart rate up to reach maximum and develop aerobic power." Asked about the hill climbs, Volkanovski added: "I have no idea how I explain the road's steepness - other than to say I don't think houses are allowed be built anywhere up it.

"But this is what I need to do.

"Because if there is one guy can get us fighting on a beach, it's Dana White. So I think you'll see me fighting on an island soon."

IN ISOLATION WITH ... Alexander VolkanovskiWatch the video @dailytelegraph.com.au
---
Latrell set to appeal $1000 police fine after Cleary home free

LATRELL Mitchell has discussed appealing his $1000 fine for breaching COVID-19 health restrictions after fellow NRL superstar Nathan Cleary was cleared of any illegality despite Tik Tok-ing on social media with five young women inside his Sydney home.

The Daily Telegraph can reveal friends of Mitchell have urged the South Sydney recruit to challenge his fine from NSW Police given, like Cleary, he was also on his own property when pictured breaching strict COVID-19 guidelines.

The move comes as Deputy Premier John Barilaro yesterday called for Cleary to be banned for CONTINUED PAGE 90 FROM BACK PAGE the rest of the season, arguing the Penrith No. 7 had "breached trust" by not revealing details of the infamous dance videos when initially interviewed by the NRL integrity unit.

A decision on what, if any, further punishment Cleary will receive is expected today.

Mitchell, meanwhile, was catapulted back into the headlines this week after video emerged of he and Melbourne flyer Josh Addo-Carr enjoying a camping weekend with mates on the expansive working cattle farm he owns at Caffreys Flat near Taree.

Apart from being fined $1000, the pair was also each hit with a NRL sanction of $50,000 (60 per cent suspended) and given one-match bans - also suspended - until the end of the season.

Cleary was fined $10,000 (60 per cent suspended) and also received the same suspended one-match ban after images emerged of him and five girls inside the home he shares with fellow Panther Tyrone May.

On Wednesday, Nepean police said Cleary would not be fined for breaching social-distancing rules as, the occupier of the house, it was not him but his visitors who broke the rules.

As Mitchell is also alleged to have not left his own property, albeit a sprawling farm, there have been discussions about him potentially appealing against the $1000 sanction.

While Souths coach Wayne Bennett rejected an interview request yesterday, it is understood questions have also been asked by some close to Mitchell about him being handed the same NRL punishment as close friend Addo-Carr.

In images uploaded to Instagram, the Storm flyer was pictured firing shotguns, riding motorbikes and generally enjoying what he later described as a cultural weekend with close friends and family.

Yet it was later revealed, the NSW Origin winger had already been warned twice in 11 days for violating COVID-19 restrictions before effectively catching himself out on what became strike three.

Twenty-two-year-old Mitchell is said to have spent much of the past few weeks training in isolation and working on his property.

As a result of the weekend, both men were also charged with firearms offences and will appear in Taree Local Court on August 4.

Cleary could still receive further punishment from the NRL after failing to disclose the TikTok videos in his first interview with the NRL Integrity Unit.

He has since been hauled into League Central for a second time. In his first grilling, he only addressed the original images that were posted online, saying he had no idea they were taken in the 10 minutes his visitors stayed before catching an Uber.

Despite the new footage, there is nothing to suggest the women stayed longer than Cleary had suggested.

The NRL is expected to deliver a verdict on what, if any, further punishment Cleary will receive today.In the days since the images were released, all three players have received heavyweight criticism from the likes of Kangaroos coach Mal Meninga, NSW coach Brad Fittler, NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian, Deputy Premier John Barilaro and commentator Phil Gould.
---
China is playing a dangerous propaganda game as it seeks to avoid responsibility for the coronavirus crisis, writes James Morrow

So, who's going to pay for all this?

That's the trillion-dollar question swirling around the globe as reserve banks fire money into their economies, countless millions of people hole up in varying degrees of isolation and quarantine, and the world comes to a standstill waiting for a cure or vaccine or some hopeful glimmer of a return to normality.

The impact goes way beyond the financial.

Around the planet careers are being shattered, businesses - particularly - are crashing out, educations are being delayed, lives are being put on hold, and no one knows what the next wave of news will bring.

And, tragically, more than 10,000 people have died, with an unknown number more potentially infected.

Not surprising then that as doctors are coping with tsunamis of patients or preparing for waves yet to arrive, lawyers and lawmakers are beginning to ask whether or not there is some way to make the Chinese government pay a price for mismanaging the coronavirus crisis and letting it be loosed upon the world.

In the US state of Florida the Berman Law Group has put in motion a class-action lawsuit against the People's Republic of China, alleging the Chinese government "knew that COVID-19 was dangerous and capable of causing a pandemic, yet slowly acted, proverbially put their head in the sand, and/or covered it up for their own economic self-interest." Speaking on Fox News this week, Indiana congressman Jim Banks said the US needed to "hold China accountable for their bad behaviour", suggesting that "we need to start by forcing China to pay the burden and the cost incurred on the United States of America due to the coronavirus." Experts are divided on whether such pushes have any chance of success but it signals a new phase in the coronavirus crisis in which the People's Republic of China furiously attempts to rewrite history to portray itself as the hero of this story, rather than an institution whose baked-in recklessness has brought the world to a halt.

MADE IN CHINA While there are a number of theories about how specifically the virus came to be, most leading experts believe the virus emerged from one of Wuhan's so-called "wet markets" where exotic wildlife including pangolins are sold and slaughtered for human consumption - activity which has caused this sort of problem before.

After the 2003 SARS outbreak, which is thought to have originated in similar circumstances, "Chinese experts strongly recommended that those markets be shut down along with the wild animal trade", Clive Hamilton, whose 2018 book Silent Invasion warned of the creeping influence and danger of Chinese Communist Party influence campaigns in Australia, told The Saturday Telegraph.

"But the people who benefit the most from the markets, the wealthy elite who like to eat these things, they lobbied against the closing," says Hamilton.

There also remains darker speculation that the coronavirus may have escaped from China's National Biosafety Laboratory in Wuhan, the country's only "biosafety level 4" lab - so certified because it is, supposedly, able to deal with the world's most dangerous pathogens safely.

Though often dismissed as conspiracy mongering, adherents to this notion point to a New York Post report that a day after Chinese leader Xi Jinping held an emergency meeting in February on how to control the coronavirus, the Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology released a new directive titled: "Instructions on strengthening biosecurity management in microbiology labs that handle advanced viruses like the novel coronavirus."

COMMUNIST COVER-UP No matter where the virus originated, one thing virtually all experts agree on: The coronavirus outbreak that started in Wuhan and has now swept its way across every continent save for Antarctica was made exponentially worse by the Chinese government's totalitarian culture of secrets and lies that puts the reputation of the party above the health of the entire planet.

What's worse, now that the genie is out of the bottle, they're trying to lie their way out of it. The government in Beijing is now, through an army of propagandists, working hard to spin the global pandemic not as a disaster, but rather a triumph, of the Chinese system's ability to swing into action.

When this newspaper ran a report this week detailing allegations that the Chinese government censored reports and destroyed lab samples in an effort to cover up the virus, the People's Republic's Sydney Consulate General fired off a letter slamming the story as "groundless" and "seriously distorted." The letter went on to claim that "since the outbreak of the coronavirus epidemic, China has consistently put people's safety and health first and adopted the most comprehensive, strict and thorough prevention and control measures" and that "the Chinese government has taken an open, transparent and highly responsible attitude in informing about the epidemic both domestically and globally in a timely manner".

"There is already an information struggle going on with the Chinese government using its foreign ministry spokespeople and embassies to cast the Chinese model of government as uniquely successful because of their management of COVID-19", says Michael Shoebridge, director of the Defence, Strategy & National Security program at the Australian Strategic Policy Institute (ASPI) in Canberra.

"That would be a masterful piece of Orwellian history writing to achieve, because without the Chinese government's suppression of doctors reporting the novel virus, the world would have had a chance of containing it in Wuhan," he says.

Paul Dibb, emeritus professor of Strategic Studies at ANU's Strategic & Defence Studies Centre, agrees blame for the disaster can and should be laid squarely at the feet of the Chinese Communist Party.

"Let's go back to the fundamental issue: China as an authoritarian communist country," Dibb says.

"As usual (in this sort of system) they have lied about it or refused to face up to the facts." "The were warned well in advance by a doctor in Wuhan, who received the classic punishment of being told 'how dare you spread lies like that', and he subsequently died," he adds, referring to ophthalmologist Li Wenliang who did his best to sound the alarm that a new severe respiratory disease was spreading, was reprimanded, and subsequently died in early February.

And by covering up - rather than dealing with - the problem Chinese officials made it exponentially worse.

A study released Thursday by the University of Southampton in the UK found that by the end of February, there were 114,325 coronavirus cases in China and that had officials leapt on the problem earlier, the spread of the disease could have been contained, by as much as 95 per cent.

According to the researchers: "If interventions in the country could have been conducted one week, two weeks, or three weeks earlier, cases could have been reduced by 66 per cent, 86 per cent and 95 per cent respectively - significantly limiting the geographical spread of the disease." Rather than learn from their mistakes, this pattern of lies and deception is continuing today, says Dibb, as Chinese officials spread the lie that COVID-19 was actually a creation of the US Army, spread by American athletes who were in Wuhan in October last year for the Military World Games.

According to Dibb, the conspiracy theory has been pushed by Chinese officials as high ranking as the country's foreign minister Wang Yi, whom Dibb points out also tried to heavy Julie Bishop when she was serving in the Turnbull government.

Last week China's Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian fired off a furious tirade on Twitter, ranting, "When did patient zero begin in US? How many people are infected? What are the names of the hospitals? It might be US army who brought the epidemic to Wuhan. Be transparent! Make public your data! US owe us an explanation!" It was this suggestion that led US President Donald Trump to, this week, make a specific point of referring to "the China virus" in front of a roomful of reporters.

While this led some commentators to join with Chinese officials in charging Trump with racism, Trump's comments remain accurate given the longstanding convention that new diseases bear the name of their place of origin.

"They are insistent that this should not be China coronavirus, fine, call it the Wuhan coronavirus", says Dibb.

In all this the Chinese government has been aided and abetted in this by its seemingly surprising ally, the World Health Organisation (WHO), headed by director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus (inset), which in the early weeks of the crisis praised China's efforts while downplaying the threat and refusing to declare a pandemic.

This, says Hamilton, is evidence of how the once-respected global public health body has slowly but surely been brought into Beijing's orbit as just another propaganda mouthpiece.

"For some years the WHO has been under the growing influence of the Chinese Communist Party and was in the early weeks of the crisis bending over backwards to keep Beijing happy" says Hamilton.

"As a result in the early weeks of the crisis the WHO was reproducing the misleading messages of the party - reassuring the world that this wasn't a big problem - when in fact it should have been warning the world and getting accurate information rather than relying on information filtered by Chinese government and party officials." The end result is that the WHO's credibility is now in tatters, says Hamilton. "The reputation of the WHO has been trashed over the last two months, as has that of its director general, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus."

WHERE TO NEXT While it is hard to see any legal action against the Chinese government succeeding - Beijing, after all, laughed in the face of 2016 ruling in The Hague against its expansion into the South China Sea - once the coronavirus crisis passes, Western governments and businesses will radically recast their relationship with middle kingdom.

This process of reducing Western nations' and companies' dependence on China is known as 'decoupling', and it has been taking place since at least the Trump administration began taking its harder line with Beijing.

Perversely says Salvatore Babones, an adjunct scholar at the Centre for Independent Studies, China may attempt to turn this process to its advantage. After the crisis passes, says Babones, "increasingly there will be a China orbit and a Western orbit, and China will use that to further its agenda".

Their dream is to be the one-stop manufacturing shop for the world, as the US was through most of the second half of the last century, Babones says, "but I doubt they'll succeed".

Either way, ASPI's Michael Shoebridge says that the old order is rapidly changing, and that Australia must know who its friends are - and stick with them.

"This is a bigger deal than just China or US-China relations and engagement. It's about rethinking the basic assumptions of globalisation and revaluing the ability to produce essential items - including medical supplies, food and fuel - in our own nations and in trusted partners. Simple nationalism is a risk here, with a better path being integration with trusted partners", says Shoebridge."For Australia, that includes at a minimum Indonesia, the US, Japan and our South Pacific neighbours."
---
JACK de Belin wants to meet NRL boss Todd Greenberg face to face for the first time in more than 12 months as the St George Illawarra star braces for the possibility of his court case dragging into a third year.

In another development, the Rugby League Players Association will use their firming position within the halls of League Central to reignite a legal challenge of the NRL's controversial no-fault stand-down policy. The players union want it scrapped.

The disruption to the justice system caused by COVID-19 has been widespread. The suspension of hundreds of cases will undoubtedly cause a mass backlog of courtrooms for the remainder of the year.

De Belin was suspended under the NRL's new no-fault stand-down policy on February 28 last year after he and co-accused Callan Sinclair pleaded not guilty to a sexual assault charge. The Dragons were hoping de Belin's next scheduled court appearance, this coming Wednesday in Wollongong District Court, would resolve the pre-trial legal arguments that have delayed the trial being heard. However, that appears forlorn, with Judge Andrew Haesler pencilling in a November 2 trial date with both de Belin's legal team and the prosecution. If the November 2 date stands, de Belin will have served 87 weeks on the sideline.

However, conscious of the impact that COVID-19 is having on the justice system and the fear his case could be pushed beyond November 2 and possibly not until 2021, de Belin and RLPA executives are pushing to meet with Greenberg to demonstrate the personal toll of the policy. It's understood the RLPA also want to show how the rule doesn't account for a delayed judicial system that is out of the former NSW Origin forward's control. The meeting request is separate to a wider challenge by the RLPA of the NRL's no-fault stand-down policy that is being overseen by an independent arbitrator.

The RLPA's dispute with the NRL is directed at the governing body and how it has used its powers to change rules, specifically related to players, without the union's consultation - as is required by the Collective Bargaining Agreement.

Ironically, the governing body's lack of consultation with the players over the game's poor financial status was also the thread of most contention in recent days - and it ultimately led to the players' union garnering greater respect from the NRL.

An arbitrator has been appointed to determine if the NRL should have consulted the RLPA in greater detail before implementing the polarising policy in February last year. Interestingly, after working closer than ever before last week to help save the game financially, the contentious rule was mentioned in-part by delegates of the RLPA during their intense discussions with the NRL.The RLPA is hoping the arbitrator rules that policy can be overturned - or at least considered for major review by the NRL - by the end of this month. If the NRL are found to be in breach of the CBA, the players' association will seek to have the no-fault stand-down rule deemed invalid, paving the way for de Belin to return to playing - when the competition resumes - as he waits for his trial..
---
This means (trade) war: China cuts our meat

BEIJING officials slapped an immediate import ban on four Australian meat processors without prior warning yesterday amid escalating tensions over China's handling of the virus pandemic.

The operators, including one in northern NSW, were stunned to learn their licences to export were suspended, due to technical labelling and certification issues dating back a year.

The trade block came just weeks after a warning from the Chinese ambassador to Australia that exports including red meat, wine and education would be targeted if the Morrison government did not end its call for an -independent inquiry into the origins of COVID-19.FULL REPORT PAGE 8
---
They call it The Everest because it's a summit that should be all but impossible to reach. And the race certainly lived up to that moniker this year. When the coronavirus -pandemic hit, the future of the race seemed in doubt, as did so many other events in Sydney. Yet this weekend the Everest roared to life, with 11,000 fans celebrating the richest race in Australia and the richest turf race in the world.

Certainly the crowds could have been bigger and the empty seating was a reminder of the need for the government to get on with increasing the density allowed at restaurants and events heading into the holiday season. But to complain about that is, for the moment, a minor quibble that ignores the fact that NSW is now open for business in ways that make us the envy of much of the world. As the mercury - we hope - starts to turn more summery, we will see more such great events. The Golden Eagle. The NRL grand final. The State of Origin series. And so on.

And while it is fashionable to dismiss the idea that one individual can change the world, it is not too much of a stretch to say that Peter V'landys has -absolutely changed Sydney for the better - and shone a light for the rest of the nation as it emerges, blinking, into the light post-coronavirus.

V'landys proved to the -nation - take note, Dan -Andrews - that you don't have to live under the doona. You can declare that an event will happen on a certain date, safely, and see it through.

It's why after the NRL came back, perhaps the first major sporting code in the world to do so after the initial hit of COVID-19, leagues and codes around the world were ringing to find out just how we did it.

It's a lesson in grit, determination and backing yourself, not arrogantly, but with confidence - which is a spirit that some of our other jurisdictions could use a bit more of, to be frank.

And it's a demonstration that rather than a death sentence, COVID-19 is actually something that can be lived with and worked around with appropriate measures and, of course, a world-class contact tracing system backing it up. Coronavirus has been rough on all of us and we all look forward to the day when the rituals of social distancing and check-ins can be relegated to the past. But for the moment, if this is the new normal for NSW, we've got it pretty good.
---
No opinions in the opinion column today.

Any and all opinions have been banned on the strict orders of Craig Bellamy, the Melbourne Storm coach who decreed this week that opinions on players like, say, his captain Cameron Smith, are irrelevant unless you have actually played in the NRL.

So, unless you have done it yourself, you are not allowed an opinion on it. That is Bellamy's Decree.

So don't tell me who you think wins the Melbourne Cup this year unless, by Bellamy's Decree, you have ridden in the Cup yourself.

That movie you saw last week? I don't care if you thought it was boring or if you loved it so much you want to tell all your friends they must see it.

Bellamy's Decree states that unless you have actually acted in a movie, or at least written a script, your opinion really doesn't matter too much at all.

And that means here, too. None of you, under Bellamy's Decree, are allowed an opinion on this newspaper column unless you have actually opened a vein over a keyboard and put down a thousand words you hope might make a difference.

The irony is that Bellamy's Decree - don't speak about it unless you have done it yourself - seems to apply to all, it seems, except Bellamy.

Just a few days back he used his pre-game press conference to defend his captain once again with a defence that was last used in the Paul Keating administration.

The opinion, hereby known as Bellamy's Decree, was flawed and dangerous back then and it is even more so now.

"I don't know whether it spurs him on or not but it's funny, the criticism comes from some people that haven't really played the game and they haven't coached the game," Bellamy said about Smith.

"All of a sudden, they're experts. Cameron has played 400 NRL games, almost 50 State of Origins and so many games for Australia.

"But people that have never played the game, never coached the game, never really been involved in a footy club come out and bag him all the time.

"Most guys that have been in the game as players or coaches - whether they like Cameron or they don't like Cameron - I think they have a lot of respect for Cameron.

"Because of what he's done in the game.

"But most of this criticism comes from guys that have never been involved in footy clubs except for when they were in under 8s or under 12s.

They've never coached in the game, they've never played the game at NRL level. "I don't really understand it. I think there should be a lot more respect for a guy that's the only guy in our game's history to play 400 games.

"If they want to make it personal - and they probably do - that's their business." It is a dangerous philosophy that says unless you have played the game you have no right to an opinion on the game.

There are hundreds of thousands of rugby league fans who buy memberships and season tickets and spend thousands of dollars on merchandise every year who have never played the game at NRL level.

Surely they deserve the right to an opinion, right?

Millions more watch the game on the very televisions that justify the big broadcast deals, that add up to something like 80 per cent of the game's revenue, and they do so with a view on the game.

They either like something or they don't like it, that is our nature. Surely they are entitled to share it with someone?

People have opinions because they care. It is impossible that every opinion will be the same and, to be honest, it would be dull if they were.

That clubs foster this thought that nobody is allowed an opinion on them unless they have played the game reveals how insular clubs really are, and this lack of understanding must be greatly alarming for the NRL.

Some of you might have noticed, but the game has just emerged from one of the most difficult periods in its history.

A huge financial reset has taken place.

Chairman Peter V'landys rescued the broadcast deal that shaved tens of millions off NRL income. Part of those negotiations centred on the fact that there has been a worrying trend in ratings in recent years which has failed to justify the richness of the broadcast deals.

That is not an opinion, just economics.

Channel 9 chairman Hugh Marks told the game it was "boring", mostly because of the wrestling tactics that originated at the Storm and which have been allowed to evolve, unhindered, for almost a -decade.

It was a comment that received widespread support.

V'landys emerged from the negotiations determined to make the game more attractive. He introduced a six-again call to replace a penalty - aware teams were deliberately conceding penalties to buy time to restore their defensive line, artificially slowing the game down - which immediately quickened the game's pace and made it far more -attractive.

V'landys knows the game must make itself more attractive to the wider public to put the game in a position to demand more broadcast money next time around.

Instead of dismissing fan concerns because they have not played the game, V'landys is doing the opposite and listening to them. They should be the priority, not the enemy.

Sports surge and fade in -importance all the time.

Boxing is no longer the sport it once was, reduced to tier-two importance. Mixed martial arts barely existed 20 years ago but is now the fastest growing sport in the world.

Rugby union once ran neck and neck with rugby league in Australia. And sports most often fail, it is generally believed, because they fail to engage the next generation.

And it has taken the COVID-19 crisis for the NRL to concede it has allowed the game to become less attractive over so many years.

A club chairman claimed V'landys told all the clubs at Wednesday's phone hook-up that the clubs must start looking beyond their own backyard and begin looking after the interests of the game as a whole.

Clubs are adopting negative tactics to win the premiership (and remain employed for the short term) without a thought for the long-term benefit of the game.

In fact, it is to the detriment of the game's long-term ambitions, but few care because they will not be around by then.

Some clubs will argue, with legitimate claims, that it is the club's job to do what it can to win premierships and that it is the NRL's job to protect the overall integrity of the game.

So the NRL has done that.

New rules designed to break the grip wrestling had on the game and to make it faster and more dynamic were introduced.

Yet after just three weeks some clubs have examined how the referees are adjudicating and begun to work out ways around the rules.

It is a cynical, distressing indictment on what the game has become. Clubs once again testing the game's nerve.

The Storm, for example, challenged the NRL last weekend, laying all over the tackled player for the next two tackles after a six-again call, almost daring the referee to double up his call.

This extra time in the tackle allowed the Storm to then -restore the integrity of their defensive line. It was exactly the kind of cynical tactic the game has declared it will stop.

Instead of copping it sweet, though, the Storm immediately claimed they were being picked on.

It is a strategy so overused it has become boring.

Publicly they claimed innocence while, behind the scenes, senior club figures campaigned to be left alone, claiming an agenda against them because they are from Melbourne.

Apparently, this opposition to neck cranks is being driven by simple state jealousy.

The Storm forget the many number of players and assistant coaches who have left their organisation for other clubs and who take that information, what they did and how they did it, with them to those clubs.

Fans do not like wrestling and the way it has shaped the game. The NRL should be commended for acting.

Here is my question, though: If the Storm is so sensitive to criticism about their wrestling tactics, why does the club invest so much time inventing new ones? Maybe someone who has played a few games can tell me why.
---
Former Tiger still friend but Benji disputes Matto's claim

BENJI Marshall insists he holds no ill will towards Ryan Matterson but the Kiwi veteran is adamant the -Tigers do have what it takes to -contend for the premiership.

Matterson walked out on the Tigers to join the Eels at the end of last season and on Thursday he will face his former club for the first time in a Western Sydney blockbuster.

His exit was reportedly fuelled by his belief the Tigers could not win a grand final but Marshall, the only -active player from the club's 2005 premiership victory, thinks the team is building towards that kind of success.

"I think we can win," Marshall said. "There's something building at this club that is showing me signs that something is there.

"You have to have that belief. If you don't, you might as well not be here. I feel like there's a belief within - that no one will come out and say publicly - that we can win.

"You have to have that mentality to compete at the top and to win. "In rugby league, players come and go but the club remains strong. Whether I'm here or not, the club remains and the fans are rock-solid.

"I love Ryan, but whether he's here or not doesn't dictate what sort of club we are." Matterson, 25, starred for the Tigers last year and nearly made his Origin debut for NSW, but he asked for a release to link up with the Eels.

His good form has continued this year and he has played a major part in Parramatta's rise to the top four.

The Tigers, fresh off a 48-0 win over Brisbane, are in seventh but have not beaten a top-eight team this year.

Marshall said he wasn't certain of the exact reasons for Matterson's departure but denied there was bad blood between the backrower and his former teammates.

"I think he's been portrayed differently to what he's actually like," Marshall said. "He's one of the nicest, most caring guys I've ever met.

"I encourage young guys, when they are going through stuff or making decisions, it can't be about what's best for everyone else, it has to suit you.

"I don't know the full situation with Ryan but he felt that was the best thing for him. You can't be angry with anyone for that.

"Matto's a great player, I thought he was one of our best players last year, and I was -gutted to lose him.

"But on the other side of the coin, in rugby league you have a short amount of time to play the game and I thought he did what he thought was best for his career, and you can't hold that against anyone.

"Even though he's not here, I'm still friends with him. Of course I would have loved him to stay." Marshall, 35, will take on Parramatta in a rich vein of form after he scored a try and set up three more in the win over the Broncos.

It was his first start since round four after he was dropped by coach Michael Maguire, and he said he was more confident in his abilities than ever before because of the time he spent on the sidelines.

"What Madge is doing is building a consistency in the way you prepare and the way you train, and you do that every week on the field," Marshall said. "Sure, he's made some tough calls, but in our team you can see some of the habits building.

"I copped the brunt of it and that's fine, but I got to go back and look at the things I needed to improve and on the weekend I'd never felt more confident about my game because of the things I'd changed." Star hooker Harry Grant missed Monday's training session as he awaited the results of a COVID-19 test. Grant took the test on Sunday after moving house.
---
THE cancellation of this year's historic Kangaroo tour of England has made me contemplate my future as Australia's head coach and set a goal of playing a Test match this year.

The three-match tour scheduled for October-November was something I was enormously excited about.

Being able to lead Australia on its first Kangaroo tour since 2003 was something I wanted to achieve after being appointed coach in 2016 and pushed hard to make happen, with the backing of the NRL and support from -international bodies.

It's understandable why the tour had to be cancelled on the back of COVID-19 and the disruption to the NRL premiership, but it is still disappointing. I am determined to make it happen and the earliest that could be possible is at the end of 2022.

I am contracted to coach the Kangaroos until the completion of next year's World Cup in England, but the cancellation of this year's tour has made me think about what I want to achieve in the role. If a Kangaroo tour for 2022 is possible, I would love to be part of it.

Being part of four Kangaroo tours (1982, 1986, 1990 and 1994) as a player is one of my greatest achievements and provided some of the fondest memories of my -career. The Kangaroo tour was the ultimate for a player at that time. There was so much tradition and esteem in being selected.

They were rugby league's version of the Olympics and to be part of a select group was fantastic. The camaraderie was something I cherished. A group of 26 went away, with most barely knowing each other, and returned best mates. We built lifelong bonds. I want the current group of Kangaroos to experience that and bring the special feeling back to international rugby league.

The cancellation of this year's tour means it is also unknown when we will play our next Test match. The Kangaroos' last outing was against Tonga at Eden Park in New Zealand last November. We lost 16-12 and while it was a historic night for Tonga, beating Australia for the first time, the defeat stung the Kangaroos.

Having looked at the new 2020 calendar, there could be an opportunity to play one Test match after the State of Origin series.

The last Origin game will be played on November 18 and there is a window to play a Test on home soil around November 27-29 against New Zealand or Tonga.

It would be the perfect way to wrap up what has been a torrid year for many reasons, but also a season that has -galvanised the game.

The Kangaroos team would be picked following the State of Origin series and be the icing on the cake. The players would all be on leave by December and have a decent break before reporting for pre-season training ahead of 2021.
---
'Either way, I've got to give them a bit of a heads up' CAMERON Smith is three weeks away from deciding whether to end the most extraordinary career in rugby league history.

The Storm great told The Saturday Telegraph he would have discussions with coach Craig Bellamy, conscious that a decision needs to be made sooner rather than later.

The career of boom Wests Tigers loan player Harry Grant is resting on his decision.

"I'm not going to string them out and leave them high and dry," Smith said. "Either way, I've got to give them a bit of a heads up." Those closest to Smith are indicating the eight-time Dally M hooker of the year will call it quits after a remarkable career that started in 2002 and has seen him run out in Storm colours for 420 NRL games.

Asked if he was mindful of Grant's future with the club, Smith said: "It's not just Harry, it's the entire squad.

"There's also Brandon Smith. There's the entire salary cap. Me playing or not playing doesn't just affect those two.

"I'm certainly very conscious of the situation around our club and where everyone's career is at.

"All that will come into consideration when I make my decision." Even at 37 years of age - he had his birthday last month - Smith is playing outstanding football.

He may no longer be the No.1 player in the NRL but he is certainly in the top half dozen, whether it be at hooker or guiding Storm from the halves while Cameron Munster is injured.

The former Kangaroos captain says he has the support of his wife Barbara and family whichever way he goes: "She's a legend my missus and she'll support any decision I make." Storm chairman Matt Tripp says there is no pressure on Smith. "No one will be rushing Cameron," Tripp said. "What he's done for Melbourne Storm gives him every entitlement to move at his own pace and think through what's best for himself and his family." Sadly, Smith will not get the opportunity for a home-ground farewell in Melbourne if he decides to retire because of COVID-19 and the closure of Victoria's stadiums, most probably for the rest of the year.

He says the talks with coach Craig Bellamy will be crucial in mid-August. "Craig's never been one with guys like Billy, Cooper or Ryan Hoffman to walk up and say 'give it away'," Smith said.

"But I'd like to get his thoughts. We've been close for such a long time." One thing Smith has ruled out is a State of Origin comeback for the Maroons in November.

"It's raised every year," he said. "It won't be happening.

"Queensland have some really good number nines running around at the moment "Harry (Grant), Reed Mahoney and Jakey Friend are all playing fantastic footy."

RUGBY LEAGUE'S OLD BOYS' CLUB Paul Gallen (Cronulla) 38 years 31 days Cliff Lyons (Manly) 37 years 313 days Cameron Smith (Melbourne) 37 years 23 days Darren Smith (Brisbane) 36 years 284 days Chris Heighington (Newcastle) 36 years 230 days Jeremy Smith (Newcastle) 36 years 142 days Petero Civoniceva (Brisbane) 36 years 140 days Adam MacDougall (Newcastle) 36 years 126 days Allan Langer (Brisbane) 36 years 60 days
---
NSW's in-form stars light up NRL to leave Queensland in state of disarray

FORMER independent commission boss John Grantonce insulted NSW by declaring Queensland was the true heartland of rugby league.

Yet at the halfway mark of the NRL season, the state's three teams are hopelessly off the pace and already out of -finals contention.

The Broncos, Titans and Cowboys were flogged over the weekend by a combined score of 112-16.

You go through the form at every club and not one current Queensland Origin player would be in contention to win a Dally M positional award.

Lucky they have Harry Grant at the Wests Tigers coming through. The NRL's new rules have thrown up new contenders for the Dally M team of the year as the premiership hits the halfway mark.

If positional awards were being handed out on form from the opening 10 rounds of the competition, this is how it would look. It's painful reading for -Maroons fans.

FULLBACKS Contenders: James Tedesco, Clint -Gutherson, Ryan Papenhuyzen Parramatta skipper Gutherson has been the most consistent of the lot. His fantastic form at the back is one of the major reasons behind Parra-matta's magnificent start to the competition, despite the hiccup against Manly on Saturday night.

Papenhuyzen could not have been more impressive at Melbourne Storm. His try against the Raiders was pure skill and speed. He is a freakish talent.

Tedesco has missed three games but has played a number of blinders to retain his rating as the game's best football player.

THE WINNER: James Tedesco

WINGERS Contenders: Maika Sivo, Brett Morris, David Nofoaluma Morris turns 34 next month but is still playing some of the best football of his career. Has scored nine tries and his defence has been outstanding.

Nofoaluma has also scored nine tries. He's a danger whenever he touches the ball and his feat is more impressive considering the Tigers' attack is not as spectacular as their rivals.

Sivo has been a one-man wrecking ball. He's impossible to contain once he winds up on the left side for the Parramatta Eels.

THE WINNER: Maika Sivo

CENTRES Contenders: Josh Morris, Stephen Crichton, Joey Manu, Bradman Best, Michael Jennings One of the more difficult positions to rate. Like his brother, Josh Morris has been sensational.

Manu had a poor game for the Roosters against the Raiders but has been otherwise exceptional.

At the Knights, Best has burst onto the scene in spectacular fashion. He destroyed South Sydney's right edge on Saturday night, while his opposite James Roberts missed six tackles.

Jennings, at 32, just keeps on producing - like the Morris twins. And Crichton at the Panthers has been the find of the season alongside Harry Grant.

THE WINNER: Stephen Crichton

FIVE-EIGHTHS Contenders: Luke Keary, Jack Wighton, Dylan Brown Brown has been super impressive at the Eels, especially in the absence of Mitch Moses.

Then it's a coin toss. How can you possibly split two champions - Keary and Wighton.

Wighton took on more respons-ibility without Josh Hodgson and led the Raiders to victory over the Roosters on Thursday night in an SCG -boilover.

Keary has been the best player in the competition since the COVID-19 resumption. THE WINNER: Luke Keary

HALFBACKS Contenders: Nathan Cleary, Mitch Moses, George Williams, Mitchell Pearce Another tough one. Cleary missed rounds three and four while suspended and gave Moses a big head start. However, Moses has missed the past three games and there's little between them.

Their battle for the State of Origin Blues jersey with Pearce during the finals will make big headlines. Pearce had a blinder on Saturday against Adam Reynolds behind a dominant pack.

At the Canberra Raiders, Williams has settled in beautifully.He is a quality playmaker and can sniff a try from anywhere.

THE WINNER: Nathan Cleary

HOOKERS Contenders: Harry Grant, Apisai -Koroisau, Cameron Smith It's hard to believe Origin and Kangaroos hooker Damien Cook isn't among the contenders. He hasn't played poorly but not been as effective as in recent seasons despite a big final 15 minutes against the Knights. Smith is having yet another great year but more recently in the halves.

Koroisau has been more responsible for the Penrith Panthers' revival than any other player.

And at the Wests Tigers, Grant has remarkably emerged as a likely Origin hooker just 10 rounds into the season. He is the complete footballer.

THE WINNER: Harry Grant

FRONT-ROWERS Contenders: James Fisher-Harris, Junior Paulo, Reagan Campbell--Gillard, Siosiua Taukeiaho Until Saturday night at Brookvale Oval, Parramatta bookends Paulo and Campbell-Gillard had been -unstoppable.

Taukeiaho at the Roosters is playing powerfully every week. At the Panthers, big Fisher-Harris has laid the foundations for his team's success.

He has always been a good front-rower … now he's a great one. James Tamou has also played a dominating role.

THE WINNER: James Fisher-Harris

SECOND-ROWERS Contenders: Viliame Kikau, Ryan Matterson, Shaun Lane, Luke Garner Manly junior Garner has been a powerhouse at the Wests Tigers. He could be a bolter for Origin if the club is playing finals football. He's tough, strong and fast. At Parramatta, both edge forward Matterson and Lane have been dominating the competition. On Saturday night we saw how badly the Eels missed Matterson.

At Penrith, big Kikau is a barnstorming threat every time he touches the ball. He's also added new skills to his game, as we saw with the spectacular round-six try against the Storm.

THE WINNER: Viliame Kikau

LOCKS Contenders: Isaah Yeo, Jason Taumalolo, Nathan Brown, Jake Trbojevic and Joe Tapine.

Brown has played only six of 10 games for the Eels but has been among the best forwards in the competition. Taumalolo hasn't been quite as dominant in a struggling Cowboys side.

Tapine at the Raiders is strong and skilful every week, while Manly's Trbojevic is the most consistent and wholehearted 80-minute player in the competition.

At the Panthers, Yeo is the most underrated forward in the NRL. Just like Tapine - tough with beautiful skills.

THE WINNER: Nathan Brown

HIGHLIGHT South Sydney's stunning final 15 minutes against the Knights, with three glorious tries that turned the game into a heart-stopping thriller and a result the never-say-die Rabbitohs very nearly pinched.

LOWLIGHT Channel 9 handed out its VB Hard Earned Award on Friday night to Broncos front-rower Payne Haas despite his side being flogged 48-0 by the Wests Tigers. Seriously, what game were they watching? Haas wasn't even among the top dozen players. This is a complete farce.

LOWLIGHT II The referees' refusal to use the sin bin for blatant foul-play incidents. Bulldogs half Kieran Foran was hit high and late by Tariq Sims and had to be taken off for an HIA. Sims stayed on the field. Foran didn't return.

SPOTTED Former Channel 9 Footy Show star Beau Ryan on the Gold Coast enjoying the school holidays with his family.

SPOTTED II The great Kiwi halfback Gary Freeman still playing lower grade rugby union at 58 for Beecroft. There's mail he even got a yellow card. Onya Whiz.

SPOTTED III The Knights' Adam O'Brien throwing out a challenge to Craig Bellamy as the maddest NRL coach with his box antics against the Rabbitohs on Saturday night.

SHOOSH Having already signed Nick Cotric, the Bulldogs are now considering an approach to injury-prone Brisbane Broncos star Jack Bird to switch to Belmore next year.

ROUGH INITIATION It was a tough afternoon for caretaker Bulldogs coach Steve Georgallis in Wollongong on Saturday. The TV feed into the coach's box wasn't working and he missed a number of crucial replays.

360 VIEW Catch you tonight on NRL 360 on Fox Sports at 6.30pm with Ben Ikin, Paul Kent and James Hooper to discuss all the biggest issues from round 10 of the competition.

2019 DALLY TEAM OF THE YEAR Fullback: James Tedesco (still the one) Wing: Ken Maumalo (only three tries this year) Centre: Latrell Mitchell (moved to fullback) Five-eighth: Cameron Munster (been injured) Halfback: Mitchell Moses (missed last three) Hooker: Cameron Smith (playing in halves) Prop: Payne Haas (lost form) Second row: John Bateman (been injured) Lock: Cameron Murray (not as dominant)
---
RUGBY league is set to get its own version of Oktoberfest this year, with the 2020 State of Origin series to be played after the NRL grand final.

Following weeks of conjecture about where Origin will fall this season, The Daily Telegraph can reveal plans are now being drawn up for the code's showpiece event to be staged after the competition decider.

The decision by the Australian Rugby League Commission ensures the best chance of having sell-out Origin crowds - and therefore significantly increased revenue - attending the three-game series between NSW and Queensland.

The decision also means that should the NRL competition resume as planned on May 28, or even a week later, the clubs can play all 13 rounds, plus a finals series without -interruption.

All of which means October suddenly shapes as the greatest month of rugby league ever.

Under the bold plan, Sydney could also host all four matches if any lingering COVID-19 restrictions remain in place. Ideally, Origin will be played in both states before full houses.

However, the NRL is also preparing for the possibility of playing in locked stadiums, with a statewide push in NSW already under way to have all three matches in Sydney if -restrictions are still in place. The move comes after Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk effectively put Origin up for tender earlier this week, sensationally ruling Brisbane out of hosting during the ongoing pandemic.

CONTINUED PAGE 82 FROM BACK PAGE It means that should games still be locked out in October, as has been suggested, or any type of coronavirus restrictions are still in place, the Harbour City can host all three games.

Certainly, the announcement of a date will be welcome news for NSW coach Brad Fittler, who has already scrapped all planning his staff had done for Origin I in Adelaide.

Blues staffers had not only visited the city but organised accommodation, gym and training fields, even which restaurants his team would eat in on certain nights.

Now, however, Fittler and his team, who meet weekly via Zoom, can start preparing in earnest to give NSW their first Origin 'threepeat' since 2005.

Speaking on Wednesday, NSWRL boss Dave Trodden welcomed the chance to host an entire State of Origin campaign in Sydney: "We won't have the same issues as Queensland." Deputy Premier John Barilaro also backed the move after meeting ARLC chairman Peter V'landys, NRL CEO Todd Greenberg and Project Apollo head Wayne Pearce.

"If we follow health advice and the NRL has proper protocols in place, I'd be cheering for NSW to host all three Origin games," Barilaro said.

If fans were still locked out of grounds in October, Bankwest Stadium would be the likely Origin venue.Maroons coach Kevin Walters has said he is happy to play all three games in NSW if required.
---
Victorian Premier Dan Andrews has been using his state's inquiry into Victoria's disastrous coronavirus failures as a shield to avoid commentary on the issue.

Every time Andrews has faced press conference questions about his government's obvious missteps, he pretends that the inquiry prevents his ability to respond.

It doesn't. As The Daily Telegraph has pointed out, the inquiry does not have trial status. There is no jury to be influenced by anything Andrews says.

The premier was always free to comment - or, more appropriately, to apologise for his government's incompetence.

Nowhere was that incompetence more damaging than in the decision to employ private security firms instead of police to guard quarantine hotels.

Well, the time is almost up for Andrews. The inquiry began yesterday, and the opening -remarks of Tony Neal QC, the counsel assisting, went directly to the heart of the matter.

"Information already available to the inquiry suggests the possibility of a link between many of the cases of coronavirus identified in the Victorian community in the past few weeks and persons who were quarantined under the hotel quarantine program," Neal said.

Then came this follow-up: "Comments made by the chief health officer to the media have suggested that it may even be that every case of COVID-19 in Victoria in recent weeks could be sourced to the hotel quarantine program." Every. Single. Case. No wonder Andrews has been so keen to avoid any answers. Unlike the Victorian and Australian public, who have been denied access to the medical data on how the coronavirus spread from its quarantine origins, Neal and the inquiry will have all of that evidence.

What the inquiry does not have is much time. The inquiry is due to report by September 25.

Still, that may be time enough to establish the key facts in Victoria's quarantine debacle - and who was responsible.

Andrews will likely continue stonewalling. Yet all that will do is build anger as the inquiry's due date draws near.

Despite its brevity, we would ask that the inquiry also investigate how Victoria's coronavirus incompetence influenced increased infection rates in NSW. NSW has an enormous stake in this inquiry, too.
---
IMF LOOKING AT 'MORE DIRE SCENARIOS'

THE Australian share market has suffered its biggest sell-off in six months as it finally yields to fears intensive efforts to contain the coronavirus outbreak are failing.

And the Aussie dollar is plumbing fresh 11-year lows against the greenback, caught in the rip as investors grow increasingly wary about the outlook for the global economy.

In its worst session since August, the benchmark ASX 200 shed 2.3 per cent yesterday, cutting $48.3 billion from the value of companies in the index. It fell heavily at the open - quickly exceeding the 0.7 per cent slide signalled by futures markets - and lost more ground later in the session.

It marked an abrupt change of gear for the market, which had broadly been rising throughout February despite mounting fears authorities were struggling to stop the spread of the virus.

The fall yesterday came after one of the world's leading economic bodies, the International Monetary Fund, warned it would be "prudent" to prepare for a significant fallout from the Covid-19 outbreak. In a statement, IMF managing director Kristalina Georgieva said the outbreak was a global health emergency, had disrupted economic activity and could put a recovery in global growth at risk.

"Above all, this is a human tragedy, but it also has negative economic impact," Ms Georgieva said.

Even if the virus were rapidly contained, growth in China and the rest of the world "would be impacted", she said.

"Of course, we all hope for a V-shaped, rapid recovery - but given the uncertainty, it would be prudent to prepare for more adverse scenarios." Last month, the IMF forecast the global economy would grow 3.3 per cent this year, up from 2.9 per cent last year.

Ms Georgieva said the IMF now expected the outbreak to cut China's rate of growth this year from a projected 6 per cent to 5.6 per cent - in turn cutting about 0.1 percentage points from global growth.

"But we are also looking at more dire scenarios where the spread of the virus continues for longer and more globally, and the growth consequences are more protracted," she said.

In a separate report, Moody's Analytics said efforts by Chinese authorities to curtail the spread were without precedent.

Moody's analysts warned "prolonged factory closures in addition to the closure of major transport linkages are a significant blight on normal manufacturing operations".

"Until the virus is contained and the number of infected patients stops rising, the toll on manufacturers and the broader economy will continue to rise," they said.

In developments at the weekend, South Korean President Moon Jae-in said he was putting his country on its highest alert for infectious diseases, ordering officials to take "unprecedented, powerful" steps to fight an outbreak there.

In Italy, authorities battled to contain Europe's first major outbreak. There were also some virus clusters with no direct links to China, where authorities were struggling to trace the origins.

In Australia, companies including shopping centre owner Vicinity Centres, casino group Crown Resorts and theme park operator Village Roadshow have warned the virus outbreak is taking a toll as tourist numbers slide.

Others to warn of an impact yesterday included BlueScope Steel. Reporting a 70 per cent drop in first-half net profit on the back of weaker steel prices, BlueScope warned the virus outbreak would "heavily impact" its Chinese business.

Earlier in the day, the Aussie dollar hit a fresh 11-year low against the greenback, at US65.85c. It was March 2009, in the thick of the financial crisis, when it last traded at such depths against the US dollar.

peter.taylor@news.com.auwith AP, AAP
---
74 TREVOR HOHNS Age: 66 Australian cricket chairman of selectors Source of power: Has presided over a tempestuous era with quiet authority. Not prone to rash decisions or big public statements but tough when it matters, even when dealing with the game's biggest names. A kingmaker for any emerging cricket talent.

CRADDOCK

73 JAMIE WHINCUP Age: 37 Supercars driver Source of power: The greatest Supercars championship driver with seven titles, Whincup is also a Supercars Commission member and part-owner of Red Bull Holden Racing. With 122 race wins to his name, the Holden hero has taken over from Craig Lowndes as the face of the sport.

PHELPS

72 RUSSELL CROWE Age: 56 South Sydney Rabbitohs co-owner Source of power: Best known for being an Academy Award-winning actor, Crowe is also one of the most influential men in rugby league. Buying a stake in his favourite team in 2006, Crowe saved the Rabbitohs from the scrap heap before transforming them into a premiership-winning team. A hands-on co-owner, Crowe has also used his worldwide fame to promote rugby league to a global audience.

PHELPS

71 DYLAN ALCOTT Age: 30 Wheelchair athlete Source of power: Multi-talented athlete who has won Paralympic gold medals in wheelchair basketball and tennis as well as winning grand slam singles titles. Motivational speaker, radio host and TV personality, Alcott has also established his own foundation to support young people with disabilities.

LINDEN

69 ADAM SCOTT Age: 40 Golfer Source of power: Australia's only US Masters winner is many things to his sport for his appeal covers a broad spectrum, from kids who want to be like him to fathers who want his swing. With his flawless demeanour and good grace, he keeps golf cool to the masses.

CRADDOCK

68 CRAIG KELLY Age: 54 TLA Australia chief executive Source of power: Closely aligned to the AFL for more than two decades, the 1990 Collingwood premiership player controls Australian sport's largest talent management, events and marketing empire.

WARNER

67 PATTY MILLS Age: 32 NBA player Source of power: Australia's most prominent Indigenous basketballer. Won an NBA championship with the San Antonio Spurs in 2014 and has represented Australia at three Olympics. Has his own foundation which campaigns on social justice issues and is heavily involved in initiatives to wipe out racism and provide pathways for young Indigenous athletes to play top-level sport. LINDEN

65 Craig Bellamy Age: 61 Melbourne Storm coach Source of power: Regarded as the NRL's best coach behind Wayne Bennett, Bellamy is the mastermind behind the Melbourne Storm. He has taken the Storm to nine grand finals since starting his head coaching career with the club in 2003. The former Raiders winger has the best win percentage of any NRL coach in the history of the game.

PHELPS

64 TIM TSZYU Age: 26 Boxer Source of power: Intriguing performer - as all unbeaten stars are. The son of boxing superstar Kostya has won all 16 pro-fights and took his credibility to the next level with his recent demolition job on the well-respected Jeff Horn. Marked as a global presence for years to come. Could be anything.

CRADDOCK

63 CHRIS WALLER Age: 47 Racehorse trainer Source of power: Arrived in Sydney from NZ in 2000 to set up stables at Rosehill, borrowing money to make the move. In two decades he has achieved phenomenal success, preparing more than 3000 winners, including 117 at Group 1 level. Famous as the trainer of Winx, he has won 10 successive Sydney trainers' premierships and was added to the Australian Racing Hall of Fame in 2018.

THOMAS

62 DAVE TRODDEN Age: 59 NSWRL chief executive Source of power: While not a household name, Trodden is the man who controls grassroots rugby league. As chief executive of the NSWRL, the Sydney solicitor not only runs junior rugby league in NSW but also controls one of the game's biggest assets - the NSW Blues.

PHELPS

61 MARK SKAIFE Age: 53 Supercars pundit and former driver Source of power: One of the most successful drivers in V8 history, Skaife has moved on to rival Neil Crompton as the voice of his sport. A Fox Sports commentator, Skaife is also a track designer and behind-the-scenes powerbroker.

PHELPS

60 BRAD FITTLER Age: 48 NSW State of Origin coach Source of power: A former rugby league great, Fittler is the NSW State of Origin coach. With the final say on the NSW team, Fittler also holds sway as a commentator for Channel 9. He is still well connected at former club the Roosters.

PHELPS

59 MEGAN DAVIS Age: 45 ARL commissioner Source of power: Pro Vice Chancellor UNSW, Acting Commissioner of the NSW Land and Environment Court and a member of the NSW Sentencing Council, Professor Megan Davis added rugby league to her portfolio when she joined the Australian Rugby League Commission in 2017. Prof Davis leads the way in rugby league when it comes to Indigenous affairs.

PHELPS

58 BEN SIMMONS Age: 24 NBA player Source of power: One of Australia's highest paid sportsmen since being selected as the No.1 draft pick by the Philadelphia 76ers. His shirts are among the biggest sellers in Australia and he is one of the big names behind the Do More anti-racism initiative in Australia.

LINDEN

57 PAT CUMMINS Age: 27 World No.1-ranked Test bowler Source of power: A team man yet his own man, he could be Australia's next Test captain and his influence is growing in his now permanent role as Australia's vice-captain. Pace, precision and poster-boy looks make him that rare combination of prime mover and pin-up boy.

CRADDOCK

56 GREG ALEXANDER Age: 55 Fox Sports NRL commentator and Origin assistant coach Source of power: One of the most respected figures in the game, Alexander has one of the best minds in rugby league and is surprisingly powerful behind the scenes. A Panthers great who is now best known as a commentator for Fox Sports, Alexander is also on the board of the Penrith Panthers and an assistant coach of the NSW State of Origin team.

PHELPS

55 TREVOR NISBETT Age: 63 West Coast Eagles chief executive Source of power: Veteran frontman for one of Australia's most powerful sporting clubs. Survived the Eagles' illicit drugs crisis and fiercely protects the west's interests in a Victoria-dominated competition.

WARNER

54 CLINT NEWTON Age: 39 RLPA chief executive Source of power: The voice of the players, former Newcastle Knights forward Clint Newton is the head of the Rugby League Players Association. Newton is the man that takes the fight to the NRL when issues are raised by the players. Appointed to the role earlier this year, he played his part in ensuring the game resumed following the COVID crisis.

PHELPS

53 AMANDA ELLIOTT Age: 65 Former VRC chairwoman Source of power: Trailblazer for women in racing administration for two decades. In 2002, became only the second woman to be appointed to the Victoria Racing Club committee then was elected vice-chairwoman in 2011. Became first chairwoman of the VRC in 2016 and held that position until stepping down after the 2020 Melbourne Cup carnival.

THOMAS

52 MATTHEW TRIPP Age: 46 Melbourne Storm executive chairman Source of power: Has come from nowhere to rival Nick Politis as the biggest player at club level in rugby league. Appointed to the Storm top job in May, and with an estimated net worth in excess of $250m, the former BetEasy owner has become a serious NRL force. While Politis does his best work in the background, Tripp has not been shy in taking his fights public.

PHELPS

51 JAMES JOHNSON Age: 38 Football Federation Australia chief executive Source of power: One of the youngest sporting CEOs in the country. His challenge is to help football realise its full potential. Off to a good start after helping secure the 2023 FIFA Women's World Cup and extending the broadcast deal with Fox through to 2020-21.

LINDEN

50 LYNNE ANDERSON Age: 64 Australian Paralympic Committee chief executive Source of power: Has a long history in rugby league but it's her work with the APC that has elevated her to become one of the country's most powerful sports administrators, securing millions of extra dollars in funding and landmark TV deals.

LINDEN

49 DAVID SHARPE Age: 53 Sports Integrity Australia chief executive Source of power: Sport's top cop in the fight against doping. Has overseen cases against Olympic swimmer Shayna Jack and West Coast forward Willie Rioli, with a rescheduled Tokyo Games to come.

WARNER

48 BUDDY FRANKLIN Age: 33 Sydney Swans star Source of power: Fading as an on-field force but still the face of the AFL in Australia's biggest city and can pack out the SCG. Two years to run on one of the biggest domestic contracts signed - $10 million over nine years.

WARNER

47 WAYNE PEARCE Age: 60 ARL commissioner Source of power: Balmain Tigers legend spearheaded "Project Apollo" and ensured the NRL was the first sport to return following the COVID-19 outbreak. PHELPS

46 LLOYD WILLIAMS Age: 80 Racehorse owner Source of power: Lloyd Williams is a property developer and businessman who is the founder of the Crown Casino and Entertainment Complex in Melbourne. Williams also has significant thoroughbred racing interests and his opinions influence racing industry policy. He is the most successful owner in Melbourne Cup history with seven wins - Just A Dash (1981), What A Nuisance (1985), Efficient (2007), Green Moon (2012), Almandin (2016), Rekindling (2017) and Twilight Payment just over a month ago.

THOMAS

45 JEFF KENNETT Age: 72 Hawthorn president Source of power: Former Victorian premier who isn't afraid to hold the AFL to account but came inside the tent in 2020 as a member of the league's emergency "war cabinet" that was established to help steer the competition to economic safety.

WARNER

44 RYAN STORY Age: 38 Supercars team owner Source of power: A former Liberal Party adviser and a maths whiz, Story is the man behind Ford's return to Supercars. Story also saved Dick Johnson Racing by buying into the famous team before going on to win a championship three-peat.

PHELPS

70 ADAM GOODES Age: 40 Ex-AFL star Source of power: Arguably the figurehead of Indigenous sportspeople in Australia. A two-time Brownlow Medallist, two-time premiership star and Australian of the Year whose greatest legacy will be taking a stand against racism.

WARNER

66 CATE CAMPBELL Age: 28 Olympic swimmer Source of power: Double Olympic champion and former world record holder, Campbell is the face of the Australian Olympic team and has been increasingly taking a stand on athlete issues. A member of the AIC Athletes' Commission, she is behind the breakaway ISL competition to pay swimmers real wages. LINDEN CONTINUED PAGE 104
---
AFTER more than a month in quarantine, 49 crew members disembarked the Ruby Princess at Port Kembla yesterday.

A team of rescuers including police, the Australian Defence Force and medical staff, were met with cheers from crew on their balconies, some banging pots and flying flags. One man was so relieved to finally be off the ship, he performed a haka and jumped into the air, waving goodbye to those left on board.

The crew members - from the US, UK, Ireland, New Zealand, Canada and Japan - were bussed to hotels in Sydney where they will remain until their flights home in the next three days.

"I never thought the day would come, I've been in the cabin for about a month now," one woman said.

Luggage was sprayed with disinfectant and the crew were given temperature checks before being allowed to leave the ship.

One of the group, who has tested positive for COVID-19, will be quarantined in a NSW Health managed hotel for 14 days before flying home, police said.

On Monday, 19 more crew on the ship tested positive, taking the total number to 190.There are still a large number of crew on board who will tomorrow return with the ship to its point of origin in the Philippines.
---
AN advertisement that highlights the virtues of being confined to Australia after someone "ate a bat" has been cleared by an official investigation, although some who scrutinised the commercial believed it incited contempt and ridicule of China and Chinese people.

The ad, for outdoor equipment company BCF, also -depicts a caucasian man eating a bat burger.

One complaint highlighted in the new Ad Standards Bureau's community panel report said: "This is ... scientifically -inaccurate but my complaint is ... implied racism against China, even if the depiction is not a Chinese person." BCF told the panel its ad was aimed at encouraging -people to enjoy Australia and stay positive.

"Whilst eating a burger with a bat inside can be interpreted to reference the suspected origin of COVID-19, it is a lighthearted scenario intended to be humorous in nature and in no way references race or ethnicity," BCF said.

A minority of panel members found the ad breached the section of Australian Association of National Advertisers' code of ethics that prohibits discrimination or vilification.

"The minority of the panel noted that there has been an increase in negative community opinion towards China since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, and considered that this advertisement reinforces casual racism directed at Chinese people by implying that they are strange and that their strange habits (eating bats) caused a global pandemic.

"The minority considered that the advertisement does -incite contempt and ridicule towards China and Chinese people and is a breach of the code," the panel report said.

But the majority concluded "that showing a person eating a bat as part of a sandwich is a humorous reference to what was widely believed to be the source of the COVID-19 pandemic - the animal to human transfer of the disease in a wildlife market in China.

"The majority considered that using such a reference was lighthearted and comedic, and was not discriminatory." The panel report said the majority noted that a Chinese person was not used in the -advertisement, but "rather a man wearing a wide brimmed hat and holding a fishing rod - intended to be stereo-typically Australian." A poll of more than 4000 people on The Daily Telegraph website found 86 per cent of respondents considered the complaints to be baseless. BCF declined to comment on the Ad Standards report.
---
From what we buy to what we watch and how we travel, the coronavirus has hit every facet of the way we live. JACK MORPHET reports.

TOLL ROADS TENS OF THOUSANDS FEWER CARS AND TRUCKS ON SYDNEY'S BUSIEST ROADS Sydney's average daily traffic down by 5.2 per cent between January and March - and that's taking into account that January, February and the first half of March were normal NRMA IS RESPONDING TO 25 PER CENT FEWER CALLS FOR ROADSIDE ASSISTANCE NRMA DOWN 25%

16,000 fewer cars and trucks on the M2 from Lane Cove to Baulkham Hills on average every day 5000 fewer vehicles each day on both the Eastern Distributor from the city to the airport and M5 West from Prestons to Beverly Hills 13,000 fewer daily trips along the M7, which links the M2, M4 and M5

TV Prime time audiences tuning in between 7.30pm and 9.30pm are up 13.2 per cent, compared to the weeks before self-isolation rules kicked in in March TV ratings throughout the day are between 24.5-50.2% higher than the same time last year

TRAFFIC During March there were DOWN 48% fewer commuters on ferries, 33 PER CENT fewer passengers on buses and 38 PER CENT fewer train travellers Traffic on Sydney's roads fell 55 PER CENT in the past four weeks Drive times were 30 minutes faster from Manly to Town Hall, 35 minutes faster from Ryde to Central station, 37 minutes quicker from Parramatta to Central, and six minutes quicker from Marrickville to Surry Hills

PETROL DEMAND FOR PETROL AT THE BOWSER HAS PLUMMETED BETWEEN 30-50% COMPARED TO THE SAME TIME LAST YEAR, ACCORDING TO CALTEX Petrol prices have fallen below $1 per litre and expected to keep falling to an 18-year-low of 90c per litre

INTERNET Demand soared by MORE THAN 70% when work and school went online MORE THAN 50% spike in data consumption between 1am and 4am Traffic in NSW between 9am and 11am was 90 PER CENT higher last week than before COVID-19 Nearly one-third more internet data used in the peak period between 8pm and 10pm

ALCOHOL THE THIRD WEEK OF ISOLATION SAW A FLOOD OF ONLINE ORDERS FOR WINE AND SPIRITS LAST WEEK AUSTRALIA POST REGISTERED AN UP 82% INCREASE IN PARCELS WITH ALCOHOL Major retailers such as Big W, Kmart and Myer have seen online sales soar at similar levels to bottle shops

OFFICE Office supplies, computers, desks and gadgets and cleaning products have been in highest demand

FOOD DELIVERY Sydneysiders are ordering nearly twice as much takeaway food, including breakfast UP 76% BREAKFAST Food courier company Menulog has employed 2000 more bicycle couriers nationally, to keep up with a 76 per cent increase in breakfast orders and 92 per cent rise in lunch orders UP 92% LUNCH

GARDENING Two in five Australians plan to renovate their gardens during social isolation, according to research commissioned by Bunnings Increased sales of all seeds, seedlings and plants that provide privacy

ELECTRICITY Residential electricity use has increased 3 PER CENT, according to Origin

53% OF PEOPLE IN NSW ARE WORRIED ABOUT THE INCREASE TO THEIR ENERGY BILL WHILE SELF-ISOLATING, ACCORDING TO NEW RESEARCH FROM FINDER

BUSES TRAINS FERRIES 75-85% declines across all public transport services even though timetables have NOT CHANGED

TOILET PAPER Woolworths sold 11.5 MILLION rolls nationally last week, down from 15 MILLION in the lead-up to Easter and 20 million at the start of the month CASH Tap-and-go payments with debit and credit cards have increased 35 PER CENT so far in April at Woolworths.

JOBS 2M Fears up to TWO MILLION Australians could lose their jobs

HEALTH Deliveries from pharmacies up UP 236% and demand is still climbing (32% increase last week) POPULAR ITEMS INCLUDE TOOTHPASTE, VITAMINS, TISSUES, TAMPONS, EARBUDS AND ANTIBACTERIAL WIPES

SAVINGS 380,000 people could be broke in a matter of days if they were forced to live on their savings According to Finder's monthly rolling survey, the median responder only had $1500 cash on hand (the average was $28,727) 6% of people could not last a week living off savings, 13 % could live off savings for a week, and nearly one in three (31%) would not make the month-mark

POST Australia Post is delivering as many parcels as it would typically during Christmas or special online sales such as Black Friday Major delays due to the huge demand, far fewer planes to fly cargo around the country and social distancing measures in mail sorting facilities

WATER There was a 22 PER CENT spike in sewer blockages last month, when people who could not find toilet paper used wet wipes, tissues and paper towels insteadSydney Water is fielding 300 MORE CALLS a day from customers worried they will not be able to afford their water bill
---
Mouthpiece blames Australia

CHINA has warned the "writing is on the wall" for its relationship with Australia after blocking World Health -Organisation investigators from entering the country.

Tensions between Beijing and Canberra have been simmering since April when the federal government pushed for an independent inquiry into the -origins of the COVID-19 pandemic.

In an op-ed published by its mouthpiece The Global Times, Beijing warned "the writing is on the wall" for bilateral relations heading into 2021.

"In Australia's strategic cognition, China has suddenly turned from a partner to a 'threat' to its sovereign security," it wrote.

"The assumption that China is a rival is emerging, and confronting China has become a new political correctness in Australia." It comes after Beijing refused to allow World Health Organisation (WHO) inspectors into Wuhan, the original epicentre of the pandemic, as they had not been granted visas.

The move was widely criticised as an attempt to stymie the WHO's probe. Foreign Minister Marise Payne has demanded investigators be given access to the site "without delay".

"The WHO-convened scientific study is an important part of this work, and we look forward to the findings from the international field mission to China," she said on Wednesday.

"We hope that the necessary permissions for the WHO team's travel to China can be issued without delay.

"During this global pandemic that has affected all countries, international co-operation and partnerships will maximise our ability to respond and to equip us for the next pandemic." WHO director-general Tedros -Adhanom Ghebreyesus said he was "very disappointed" by the development. He called on China to expedite access to Wuhan, describing the mission as a "priority" for WHO.

Australia's calls for the inquiry sparked a furious response from China. Various Australian products, including barley, wine, wheat, lobster and timber, have been hit with Chinese trade sanctions since May. The Global Times said the deterioration was solely attributable to Australia's internal politics.
---
Exclusive: Freddy's boys on same flight as ref and other match officials DON'T kick the seat Freddy, referee Gerard Sutton is in front of you. In a decision that will spark conspiracy theories from Queensland, the entire NSW Blues squad will fly to Adelaide on the same plane as all nine match officials in charge of State of Origin I on Wednesday night.

'Operation Adelaide' for the Blues has taken an unprecedented turn with game one referee Sutton and video review official Steve Chiddy booked to share the same charter flight as Brad 'Freddy' Fittler's Blues.

Win, lose or draw for NSW, Sutton - who also officiated the NRL grand final last Sunday - and his team are also booked to fly back to Sydney with the Blues only hours after the historic series-opener in Adelaide.

Sutton's seat on the same flight as the NSW players, coaching staff and support team prompts immediate thoughts of what in-flight discussions may unfold if a major refereeing decision goes against Fittler's team.

Unlike other fired-up coaches who have confronted match officials after major games in the past, Fittler's laid-back nature gives NRL and NSWRL officials every confidence the coach will refrain from moving through the cabin to vent frustration over a reffing decision.

"Knowing Freddy, I wouldn't be surprised if he offered Gerard the exit aisle so he's comfortable with the extra leg room," NSWRL CEO David Trodden said.

"In all seriousness though, I know that Freddy and the entire team will show nothing but respect for the match officials, realising these unique travel arrangements are just part of the world we're living in right now." Due to the travel-bubble that both the NSW and Queensland Origin squads must adhere to, private charter flights have been booked for Wednesday night's clash with both teams set to fly in-and-out of Adelaide within 13 hours.

The COVID-19 pandemic forced the NRL to introduce charter flights for every team during last season - and on some occasions match referees have also shared the same flights.

But this will be the first time that a State of Origin team has travelled with match officials, including touch judges and standby officials.

"It's not foreign for a few of the Sydney clubs who did it this year, but for an Origin match this will be different, that's for sure," Blues team manager Peter Parr said.

The Blues hit-and-run mission to claim a valuable first-up win in Adelaide will begin with their charter flight set to depart Bankstown Airport around 10.30am on Wednesday.

They will then check-in to the Mantra Hotel in Adelaide where they can have lunch, rest and complete their preparation with a team meeting prior to boarding a bus for Adelaide Oval.

By the time they leave the ground following full-time, travel back to the airport for their return flight to Sydney and walk back into the Pullman Hotel at Sydney Olympic Park it will be 3.30am Thursday.

Interestingly, Fittler has decided to include every member of his 27-man squad on the flight to Adelaide for the series-opener. A further 21 staff, including coaching, high-performance and medical teams will also be on the flight.

Additionally, the Blues will travel with a security guard and their assigned COVID-19 officer, Mark O'Meley.

Every player and staff member will undergo a coronavirus test 48 hours before kick-off. Any player showing signs of infection will be withdrawn from the match.

OPERATION ADELAIDE ITINERARY Wednesday 10.30am - Charter flight from Bankstown Airport to Adelaide 1.30pm - Lunch & pre-game rest at Adelaide Mantra Hotel 4.30pm - Team meeting at hotel 5.30pm - Bus to Adelaide Oval 7.45pm - Kick-off Origin I 11pm - Depart Adelaide Oval Midnight - Flight from Adelaide to Bankstown Airport 3.30am - Into bed at Pullman Hotel, Sydney Olympic Park
---
Patient Zero mystery

THE source of the Avalon cluster that threw Christmas plans into disarray and put thousands of people across Sydney into isolation may remain a mystery, the state's chief health officer has said.

Seven locally-acquired cases of COVID-19 were reported from almost 24,000 tests yesterday, including a firefighter from the northern beaches. The source of the firefighter's infection is still under investigation. The man attended the Belrose Hotel on December 11, sparking an expanded call for patrons to come forward for testing.

Dr Kerry Chant said anyone who attended the Belrose Hotel between 12pm and 6pm on December 11 should get a COVID test "irrespective of whether you have symptoms or not".

Anyone who has visited the hotel at all in December is also being urged to get tested if they have had any symptoms.

"Even if you historically had an illness that you think in retrospect might have been compatible with COVID, please get a test," Dr Chant said yesterday.

She said a man in his 20s - who works at the hotel - was "one of the earliest" cases in the cluster, after reporting "a very short period of fever" on December 10.

The call for testing at the Belrose Hotel is in a bid to track down potential chains of transmission that may have sparked the Avalon cluster.

When asked what measures would be put in place to ensure another outbreak doesn't occur, Premier Gladys Berejiklian yesterday said she "can't make any assurances that this won't happen again".

"This is a very contagious disease, and I don't think any government in any place on the planet can give an assurance that outbreaks won't occur," Ms Berejiklian said.

"Sometimes the best laid plans, the best laid policies don't prevent these outbreaks from occurring, and we should accept that this is the norm until there's a vaccine." NSW Health has revealed it has "10 or 12" lines of inquiry into how the Avalon cluster started but still cannot pinpoint the source of the outbreak in the community.

"We may never find the exact source and the links, but what's most important is we are not missing unrecognised chains of transmission in the community currently," Dr Chant said.

Meanwhile, authorities announced that a Bondi case included in Saturday's numbers is likely a false positive, but further investigations were needed to confirm the person is COVID-free.

One case linked to the Rose of Australia Hotel in Erskineville and a household contact of that case will be included in Monday's numbers as they were reported after 8pm on Saturday.

The state yesterday also marked a milestone of having completed more than 4 million tests since the beginning of the pandemic yesterday. The figure includes almost 350,000 in the past week.
---
Supply and demand forcing prices up - and hurting household budgets PRICES paid by consumers for most household items have climbed this year despite COVID-19 causing Australia's biggest economic downturn since the Great Depression.

While sharp falls in fuel and childcare costs have provided some relief, a Sunday Mail analysis of detailed Australian Bureau of Statistics data has found prices have risen in two-thirds of product categories.

Household appliances, textiles and tobacco costs have surged more than 8 per cent, while almost all grocery prices are higher - led by an 8 per cent jump in vegetables.

The Consumer Price Index was identical in the 2020 September quarter to 2019's -December quarter, after --re-cov-ering from a sharp fall -between April and June.

The ABS, which monitors inflation in more than 120 different categories of goods and services, says there have been significant price rises this year in beef, drinks, jams and garden tools. That has been offset by falling prices for childcare, petrol, transport and utilities.

Economists say the coronavirus has changed the supply-and-demand forces for many products. Prices rise when consumers want more of something or when it's difficult for retailers to source it.

PwC chief economist Jeremy Thorpe said people's -behaviours had changed during the pandemic.

"We know that people are cooking more at home, buying raw ingredients," he said. "People have improved their homes and spent money on things in their home." While the ABS data shows electricity, gas and water prices have dropped, Mr Thorpe said usage had surged.

"People have been working from home and seeing very large increases in energy bills," he said. "Even as the price has fallen, they are using more of it and have had a bit of a shock when they have seen their power bills." MyBudget director Tam-my Barton said she had seen an increase in household budgeting and bargain hunting, with some people using government stimulus payments to buy appliances.

"We have also seen an -increase in online food shopping where clients have been able to search for specific specials and discounts," she said.  Ms Barton said MyBudget had seen an 11 per cent jump in utility bills in 2020 as people worked from home.

"Some key utility providers such as Origin Energy have announced reductions to assist their customers," she said.

Rising utility bills were offset by falling costs in carparking, travel and work-related expenses, Ms Barton said.

Prices of clothing, footwear and accessories are down, with Australian Retailers Association chief executive Paul Zahra saying the working-from-home trend was resulting in lower demand.

"There are less events and outings and people are nesting," he said. "These trends have been present all year and will continue until we find a new normal, particularly as far as events and working life are concerned.

"People don't need to dress up, so they're wearing casual outfits." KPMG chief economist Brendan Rynne said there had been price rises in imported goods where COVID-19 had affected the supply of products "even though demand has decreased a little because people have lost jobs and wages".

COVID PRICES GOING UP Major appliances 10.2% Household textiles 9.2% Tobacco 8.1% Vegetables 8% Small appliances 6.3% Beef and veal 5% Jams and honey 4.6% Water, juice, soft drinks 4.2% Lamb and goat 4.1% Garden tools 3.6%

GOING DOWN Childcare -25% Fuel -17% Transport fares -5% Men's shoes -4.3% Preschool, primary school -4.2% Domestic travel -3.6% Water -3.3% Communications equipment -2.3% Electricity -1.8% Clothing accessories -1.8% Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics, December quarter 2019 to September quarter 2020
---
AFTER more than a month in quarantine, 49 crew members disembarked the Ruby Princess at Port Kembla yesterday.

A team of rescuers including police, the Australian Defence Force and medical staff, were met with cheers from crew on their balconies, some banging pots and flying flags. One man was so relieved to finally be off the ship, he performed a haka and jumped into the air, waving goodbye to those left on board.

The crew members - from the US, UK, Ireland, New Zealand, Canada and Japan - were bussed to hotels in Sydney where they will remain until their flights home in the next three days.

"I never thought the day would come, I've been in the cabin for about a month now," one woman said.

Luggage was sprayed with disinfectant and the crew were given temperature checks before being allowed to leave the ship.

One of the group, who has tested positive for COVID-19, will be quarantined in a NSW Health managed hotel for 14 days before flying home, police said.

On Monday, 19 more crew on the ship tested positive, taking the total number to 190.There are still a large number of crew on board who will tomorrow return with the ship to its point of origin in the Philippines.
---
Plea for good police to cop our respect Society has watched around the world protests that "Black Lives Matter". Yes they do, as do all lives matter.

The right to protest and express views in a free society is respected and should never be removed.

An aspect of exercising the right to protest, is protection of life and property while citizens lawfully demonstrate. This is the sworn duty of law enforcement officers in every country in the world.

The actions of those Minneapolis officers who were the catalyst for these protests can never be condoned nor excused and shall be dealt with in accordance with the law.

I am confident the vast majority of law enforcement officers around the world do not condone the unlawful and excessive actions of the minority.

When participating in protests and publicly expressing views spare a thought for those officers who by virtue of their office have been charged with protecting your lives and your property.

As a NSW police officer during the Vietnam War protests, the Springbok tours etc, I like many of my colleagues were simply doing our sworn duty, yet all the time silently supporting the right to protest and agreeing with the opinions of those protesting. I am sure nothing has changed - the right to protest is respected and police around the world agree "Black Lives Matter".

As a protester, respect police, they in the main respect you and your rights - they are undertaking their sworn duties to protect you and your property.

Together society can fix this if we all work together.

Garry J Dunne, Gymea

Second wave fears after health protection ignored I hope there is no second wave of COVID-19 traceable to the Black Lives Matter demonstrations on the weekend (Demo ban goes viral, 7/6). If so, there will be hell to pay.

No one denies that being able to protest is a democratic right despite that large-scale protests sometimes spawn demagogues capable of fomenting dangerous behaviour, looting and the like.

Indigenous incarceration rates, deaths in custody, police harassment and other such issues which are suppurating sores on our national psyche form the backdrop to the explosion of rage here following George Floyd's killing in the US.

However, we are in pandemic times - forms of protest respecting social distance provisions that are so crucial to preventing further deaths from this killer plague would surely have been more advisable.

Ron Sinclair, Bathurst

Wedding miss; protest bliss Well we were supposed to be married this past weekend, however coronavirus put a stop to that.

We had to cancel the restaurant we had hired including the chefs and wait staff. Outfits and flowers were put on hold. No celebrant nor hire vehicles.

Friends from near and far were put on hold and accommodation centres suffered. There is an abundance of economic-impacting factors from this decision to social distance us all.

But, all this could have gone ahead if I had just said it was a public demonstration.

Chris Walsh, Lindfield

Listen up or lose out Dire consequences will prevail for governments not acknowledging the concerns of their citizenry regarding blatant racism and police brutality.

Worldwide millions of people are peacefully protesting the social ills in their respective countries and for national leaders and their administrations to blissfully ignore this will only ensure their political demise.

Eric Palm, Gympie, Qld

A demo that could go viral Being from a non-white background I was all for the Black Lives Matter demonstration - but I didn't go because every life matters when there is a high chance of spreading the virus among demonstrators.

I really hope the demonstration doesn't go viral.

Sam Saidden, Parramatta

Communist claptrap So the Chinese Communist Party is advising the people of China not to visit Australia due to increases in racism (Trade minister rejects China racism claim, Online 6/6)?

A couple of things they should reflect on - Australia is a multicultural country with the majority of the population not caring if you are black, white or brindle.

Secondly, with the CCP's cover- up of the coronavirus, I dare say their foreign visitors and income will be severely slashed not only by reduced Australian tourist numbers but fewer visits from the international community.

Hopefully the Chinese community will wake up and realise the Chinese people are being used by a regime that is in it for themselves and not the wellbeing of the population.

Brad P, Woodlands

Nasty lies unconvincing Now, the Chinese government has warned its citizens not to travel to Australia as it has become unsafe for them do so (Trade minister rejects China racism claim, Online 6/6).

What a load of nonsense! Their citizens know we are a beautiful country, with kind peaceful people who wish no harm to others.

I am sure the Chinese people know this, and understand that their government is telling them a bunch of lies.

Graeme Walsh, Fairfield.

Slow food is all the rage Food shopping is taking me a bit longer these days (Wake up and ditch Chinese imports, 5/6).

Having a browse on the internet to see which companies are wholly owned by Australia before venturing out to the shops. Then looking at labels for countries of origin and reading the percentage of Australian ingredients used.

If we are to support Australian farmers and growers we all should be on board with this.

It might take a while to check and we may even pay a bit extra but you will know you have done your best to keep money here and support our own manufacturers and growers who have been doing it tough.

You might even prefer the taste and quality of the homegrown variety as opposed to the imports.

Marg Swindells, Castle Hill

Briefly … Australia has a new transportation option - the bandwagon. It has unlimited seating capacity for self- righteous celebrities and rent-a-crowd protesters. Best of all, it runs on the cheapest form of renewable energy known - symbolism.

Scott, Manly "" " There will always be people who are racist but maybe we could occasionally acknowledge that there are a lot of us out there who are not and treat people for who they are and not by the colour of their skin.

Jackie, Miranda "" " If a court can approve a 20,000 crowd to attend Sydney's Black Lives Matter rally, then it should be OK for the government to approve a crowd of up to 15,000 to attend football matches.

Terry Groves, Forster "" " There may be hundreds of protests all over the world highlighting "black lives matter" but until we (the people) change it's a waste of time and energy. Maybe start with listening, change of attitude, education and understanding.

Helen, Condobolin "" " Thanks Gladys, I presume the 20,000 activists allowed to demonstrate in Sydney CBD on Saturday now brings to an end our Wuhan virus health rules. We, who have abided by these rules for the sake of all are not amused.

Peter Cattlin, Freshwater "" " Could ARL boss Peter V'landys run some leadership training sessions for our state premiers? He has displayed a natural ability for it, while our premiers vary between "drunk with power", and scared to adopt a position! A few sessions with an expert might help.

Bruce Cramond, NSW

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
THE US has slammed the Chinese- government for trying to hack its research into a coronavirus- vaccine.

US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo yesterday called on Beijing to "cease this malicious activity". "The United States condemns attempts- by cyber actors and non-traditional collectors- affiliated- with the People's Republic- of China to steal US intellectual property and data related to COVID-19 research," Mr Pompeo (pictured) said.

The FBI and Department of Homeland Security had earlier warned of the cyber espionage attempts on US scientists.

"The potential theft of this information jeopardises the delivery of secure, effective, and efficient treatment options," the FBI said.

Mr Pompeo said China's "behaviour in cyberspace is an extension of its counter-productive- actions throughout the COVID-19 pandemic".

"While the US and our allies- and partners are co-ordinating a collective, transparent response to save lives, the PRC continues to silence scientists, journalists and citizens, and to spread disinformation, which has exacerbated the dangers of this health crisis," Mr Pompeo said.

The cyber warning comes after China has been accused of covering up the origin of the coronavirus and delaying warning the world it was contagious so they could stockpile medical supplies. Australia and the US are among the nations calling for an independent investigation- into how COVID-19 spread from Wuhan to the world, infecting more than 4.3 million and killing 300,000 people.

Beijing yesterday denied responsibility for the cyber attacks. "China expresses strong dissatisfaction and firm opposition to such smearing," foreign ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian said. "Judging from past records, the US has carried out the largest cybertheft operations worldwide." The coronavirus has plunged relations between Washington and China to new lows, with US President Donald- Trump hinting this week at withdrawing from a recent trade deal.

"We got a lot of things going with China. We're not happy about China - I will tell you that," Mr Trump said yesterday at the White House."The ink wasn't dry on a great trade deal and, all of a sudden, the plague comes in from China. We're not happy about it."
---
STUCK ON THE COUCH? ENTERTAINMENT EXPERTS LEIGH PAATSCH, HOLLY BYRNES AND KATHY McCABE HAVE YOUR STAY-AT- HOME CHOICES COVERED

BOOKS CALM THE FARM Eleanor Oliphant Is Completely Fine by Gail Honeyman The original and best uplit book - there is a reason it's a bestseller! Eleanor has learned how to survive, but not how to live. Her life is carefully timetabled but one simple act of kindness will change everything. Not all change is bad and surely any change is better than just fine?

Parlour Games For Modern Families by Myfanwy Jones and Spiri Tsintziras. A trip down memory lane or, for some, a first-time experience, but perfect for these times: from rough and tumble to cards to wordplay, a compendium of games from yesteryear that will have the whole housebound family laughing.

ENERGY BOOST Sword Of Kings by Bernard Cornwell Sword-swinging Saxon warlord Uhtred of Bebbanburg returns in another fast-paced outing by Cornwell, Britain's king of historical fiction. The dry-witted warrior, of The Last Kingdom TV fame, is dragged into a vicious internal power struggle in a twisting plot that appeals to both male and female lovers of big characters and epic backdrops.

Grown Ups by Marian Keyes Irish fave Keyes is back with a brand-spanking-new bestseller that is joyful, sparkling and hopeful. Keyes brings her trademark wit to this taut and zeitgeisty family drama. Just what the world needs now.

CATCH UP The Wolf Hall trilogy by Hilary Mantel The compelling story of Thomas Cromwell, Cardinal Wolsey, Henry VIII and the political machinations and dangerous intrigue required for Henry's marriage to Anne Boleyn, told dazzlingly. Wolf Hall is the first in the trilogy - followed by Bring Up The Bodies and just-published The Mirror And The Light.

The Da Vinci Code by Dan BrownThe original page-turning masterpiece of a mystery thriller. The Louvre, an albino Catholic monk, the search for the Holy Grail, a Harvard professor, the Fibonacci sequence, a cryptographer, a safe-deposit box, a cryptex, a message written on papyrus, the tomb of Isaac Newton, Opus Dei and a conspiracy to hide the truth about Mary Magdalene. Have I left anything out?

NOSTALGIA TRIP The Chronicles Of Narnia by C.S. Lewis These books have enchanted millions of readers over the last fifty years and the magical events and characters have left many a lasting memory for adults and children alike. You may remember reading The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe, and there are six other books in the series to discover.

The Matilda Saga by Jackie French (left) Starting with A Waltz for Matilda, this is the story of our country, and a love song to our land, told by the strong women who forged a nation. What a treat.

PODCAST CALM THE FARM Oprah's SuperSoul Conversations The queen of unearthing the hacks to get through life compiles her interviews with thought gurus, wellness experts and spiritual advisers. These episodes are curated audio from her TV show SuperSoul Sunday and while you can tell it's ripped from video rather than an original podcast, it's still soothing to hear Oprah.

The Health Hacker with Adam MacDougall Footy legend turned "fitness economist", Adam MacDougall has all of the life experience and qualifications to cut through the myths and trends of the wellness and health industry. He focuses on practical solutions to exercise, food and mental health issues through his own research and talking to leaders in their field.

Energy Boost From The Newsdesk The fresh take on the stories of the day from news.com.au's Andrew Bucklow and Bronte Coy raced to the top of the podcast charts this month. They chat about the major headlines of the day and debunk the rumours around the big stories, from politics to pop culture.

Wilosophy with Wil Anderson The long-running chat podcast hosted by comedian and Gruen host has not only been entertaining but started many national conversations about mental health. Anderson's chats with fellow comedians have been heartwrenchingly revealing at times about their own struggles in life, and the Andy Lee episode about their long-running grudge was must-listen stuff.

Aunty Donna The Melbourne trio have been provoking belly laughs for several years with their fast-paced and often absurdist sketch comedy. COVID-19 isn't immune to their treatment with a recent EP titled Zach's Trip To Coles - The Musical. He has to go to Coles to "buy some dip".

Catch Up Life and Crimes with Andrew Rule One of Australia's most respected crime journalists, the Sunday Herald Sun columnist has been winning plenty of fans with his podcast investigating the bad guys of now and yesteryear. He has explored such infamous villains as the Granny Killer and hitman Neddy Smith and the more recent fraud trial of Melbourne racing identity Bill Vlahos.

Police Tape 1 Popular broadcaster Merrick Watts (below) hosts this addictive series where you can hear from investigating police officers, now off the force and on the record, as they talk about the cases that made their careers, have largely remained untold or simply made them cry. The first ep discusses the death of Michael Hutchence.

Police Tape 2: Blue Sirens Investigative journalist Natalie O'Brien reveals the stories of resilience and bravery of Australia's most remarkable women in law enforcement. The five-part series is compelling.

TV SHOWS CALM THE FARM BREEDERS STREAMING, FOXTEL ON DEMAND Ever considered suffocating your children with their own doonas? With schools looking likely to lock down, this could be you in a matter of days. Sleep-deprived and frazzled parents Paul (Martin Freeman) and Ally (Daisy Haggard) are all of us right now. If it's not the kids driving them nuts, it's parenting their parents, who have an opinion on everything, particularly planning of their deaths (sound familiar?). Enjoy this rib-tickling new British comedy with a glass of wine and maybe when the kids have gone to bed, so they don't see you laughing just a little too heartily at the parts where they share their darkest feelings about their beloved rug rats.

UPRIGHT STREAMING, FOXTEL ON DEMAND Lucky (Tim Minchin) and Meg (Milly Alcock) are two misfits whose lives literally collide on the Nullarbor track from Melbourne to Perth. He's a screw-up musician hauling more baggage than just the upright piano he's got in the back of the ute. She's a feisty teen runaway with her own secrets, but good luck getting close enough to find out what they are. It's a buddy dramedy that falls somewhere happily between The Shiralee and Last Cab To Darwin.

Energy Boost ZOEY'S EXTRAORDINARY PLAYLIST STREAMING, STAN A few days into working from home in "isolation", and bursting into song at my desk was the best it got by way of entertainment. If you need something a little more profesh than your own warbling, this feel-good series, which follows a perky young woman who hears other people's inner thoughts - except only in song and dance - is just the thing.

CHEER STREAMING, NETFLIX In the US of A, the competitive world of cheerleading is much more than just pompoms and cartwheels (it's that, but extra). This fascinating documentary takes you inside an elite squad and tells their stories of triumph over adversity, from the coach to the kids trying to use their one sporting chance in life.

CATCH UP SUCCESSION STREAMING, FOXTEL ON DEMAND This brilliant drama has had the world of media and Hollywood abuzz since it launched two seasons ago. It follows the lives of the fictional Roy family, who control one of the world's biggest media and entertainment conglomerates. When 80-year-old patriarch Logan Roy (Brian Cox) refuses to step down as CEO, a power struggle ensues. Who can, will or should succeed him? It's devilish and delicious drama.

CHERNOBYL STREAMING, FOXTEL ON DEMAND The idea of watching the story of one global crisis while another unfolds in real time may seem the act of a masochist. But we can always learn lessons from history, and this stunning miniseries captures the chaos and political manoeuvring that went on during the fallout from the nuclear meltdown at Chernobyl in 1986.

NOSTALGIA TRIP THE SOPRANOS STREAMING, FOXTEL ON DEMAND Late to The Sopranos party, I only recently binged this series for the first time and am now kicking myself for waiting so long. It's regarded as the real turning point in the golden era of today's TV dramas and, with the late James Gandolfini in the lead, it's an absolute must-watch.

THE WIRE STREAMING, FOXTEL ON DEMAND While Idris Elba settles in at home recovering from coronavirus, catch his breakout performance as Stringer Bell in this gritty five-season series.

MOVIES CALM THE FARM FROZEN 2 (PG) DISNEY+ Fresh from being crowned the highest-grossing animated movie of all time, Disney+ has rush-released this overpoweringly popular musical sequel to the streaming world. This proven crowd-pleaser doubles down on both the gleefully goofy antics and asides.

THE CHAPERONE (PG) AMAZON A delightful family-friendly affair (scripted by Downton Abbey creator Julian Fellowes) tracks Hollywood screen siren Louise Brooks' first steps on the road to fame and (mis)fortune during a tumultuous trip to New York.

CHARLOTTE'S WEB (G) FOXTEL, NETFLIX The touching story of an unlikely friendship between a naive young pig named Wilbur and a motherly older spider Charlotte. This beautiful live-action adaptation of the classic children's book by E. B. White goes best when there's minimum interference from the human cast. Kids under 10 will love every minute of it.

ENERGY BOOST FIGHTING WITH MY FAMILY (M) FOXTEL, iTunes This cheeky, scrappy-go-lucky affair is the true story of Saraya-Jade Bevis, a British pro wrestler who made a name for herself as the WWE star Paige. Interestingly, the movie is at its funniest and feistiest before Paige (played by Little Women's Florence Pugh) lands WWE legend Dwayne "The Rock" Johnson as a mentor.

SUZI Q (M)

GOOGLE, iTunes, YOUTUBE An engaging doco on the life of pioneering American rock star Suzi Quatro. The leather-clad icon herself is present as an open-hearted and honest contributor to her own story, as are family, friends, fans, a former husband and some ex-bandmates.

SPENSER CONFIDENTIAL (MA15+) NETFLIX One of the smarter dumb movies to come along in a while. Mark Wahlberg stars in the title role, an unconventional private investigator who used to be both a police officer and a prisoner behind bars. When his former boss is murdered, Spenser must crack the case to clear his own name as the prime suspect.

NOSTALGIA TRIP ONCE UPON A TIME IN HOLLYWOOD (MA15+) FOXTEL Some old-school Leo DiCaprio if you're itching for more of the baby-faced wonder after his brilliant display in Once Upon A Time In Hollywood. LDC plays a soldier of fortune in a compellingly confronting action pic set at the height of the 1999 civil war in the West African nation of Sierra Leone. Co-stars Jennifenseltown is captivating.

Maverick master Quentin Tarantino's love-letter to a long-lost Tinseltown is captivating.

BLOOD DIAMOND (MA15+) FOXTEL, NETFLIX Some old-school Leo DiCaprio if you're itching for more of the baby-faced wonder after his brilliant display in Once Upon A Time In Hollywood. LDC plays a soldier of fortune in a compellingly confronting action pic set at the height of the 1999 civil war in the West African nation of Sierra Leone. Co-stars Jennifer Connelly.

THE CONVERSATION (M) SBS ON DEMAND Francis Ford Coppola filmed this chilling ode to the death of personal privacy in 1974, between the masterpieces The Godfather Parts I and II. Gene Hackman is at his brilliant best as a sound surveillance expert who hears more than he should.

CATCH UP KNIVES OUT (M) GOOGLE, iTunes, YOUTUBE A cracking murder-mystery rife with loose ends, dead ends and one heck of an unseemly end. The show is stolen - and never returned - by a kookily amusing Daniel Craig (below). He plays an unorthodox private detective who knows all the answers from the get-go, but remains unsure of the question.

DANGER CLOSE: THE BATTLE OF LONG TAN (MA15+) FOXTEL, AMAZON The terrifying true story of The Battle of Long Tan during the Vietnam War, where 108 Australian soldiers had to hold their ground against a Vietcong almost twenty times in number.

MARRIAGE STORY (MA15+) NETFLIX In a manner often bordering on miraculous, this unsparing portrait of the contemporary divorce process showed us much more of a good time than anyone expected.

MUSIC CALM THE FARM Songs For Australia Julia Stone has assembled a spectacular cast of artists from around the world to cover some of Australia's most iconic songs to raise funds for the RFS, WildArk, Fire Sticks, Seed Mob and other bodies addressing climate change. Damien Rice's version of Sia's Chandelier will slay you while Stone's take on Midnight Oil's Beds Are Burning will both calm and fire you up.

Yo Yo Ma Get on social media and follow the celebrated cellist, who has launched a semi-regular #SongsOfComfort performance series. The legendary musician has chosen short classical pieces which help curb his anxiety, dedicating his rendition of the Sarabande from Bach's Cello Suite No.3 to healthcare workers on the front lines of the pandemic.

Energy Boost Monthly Mixtape by Zan Rowe The Double J legend curates my favourite updated playlist with everything new worth listening to from Australia and the world. It's perfect if you are keen for a one-stop shop of emerging artists such as Amber Mark and Sophomore to the latest releases from Tame Impala, The Strokes and Billie Eilish. Eclectic and electric.

After Hours by The Weeknd The big news when the seminal Canadian pop star released the tracklisting to his fourth album before it dropped on Friday was there were no featured artists. It appears he has reconnect with the power of one for this 14-track opus. He was clearly right to back himself, with introductory single Blinding Lights at No.1 in Australia for nine weeks.

Virtual concerts Keep your eye on your favourite artists' social media pages as many are staging impromptu live concerts as their own tours are cancelled due to the pandemic. Keith Urban, Chris Martin, John Legend, Yungblud and Pink are among the musicians who have already connected with their fans online and you can expect dozens more to join the livestream revolution.

Catch Up Festivals 2020 So now that you know you are missing out on your favourite festival with the mass gathering bans, support the artists who have lost their gigs by streaming a playlist featuring their tracks. Check out Bluesfest 2020, Groovin' The Moo 2020 and Download Festival 2020 playlists on streaming services and then head to the artists' pages to play more tunes and support them during the pandemic gig shutdown.

Albums 2020 There have been many excellent records so far this year and there's never enough time to immerse yourself in an artist's album universe. Take a mental health break and chuck on Tame Impala's The Slow Rush, Halsey's Manic, Selena Gomez's Rare, The Dangerous Age from Kate Ceberano, Steve Kilbey and Sean Sennett, Best Coast's Always Tomorrow, James Taylor's American Standard or Niall Horan's Heartbreak Weather.

Nostalgia Trip Songs From The South: Paul Kelly's Greatest Hits 1985-2019 As anyone who has ever seen this national treasure in concert can attest, Paul Kelly possesses a gentle yet persuasive power to unite people. His songs have a uniquely Australian voice and tell uniquely Australian stories and this collection of 43 songs run the gamut of his extensive repertoire. Maybe if we all played Paul Kelly at the same time, it could reignite the Australian spirit.

ZZ Top: That Little Ol' Band FromTexasZZ Top may be the only rock band whose line-up has remained the founding three members for 50 years. Their origins and evolution prove to be a fascinating and wholly original tale in this documentary, stretching right back to how three oddball teen bluesmen landed on their unique sound and look. Archival footage shows guitarist Billy Gibbons and bassist Dusty Hill without the trademark beards.

1999 by Prince (Super Deluxe) This may have slipped under your radar as it came out in late November. There was a physical box set going for $400 but you can also take the streaming route and enjoy 65 songs - the final recorded versions, demos and live cuts - when you have a spare five hours and 53 minutes.

FOR MORE LISTINGSDAiLYTELEGRAPH.com.au
---
SOME of the NRL's biggest names have been hailed as "heroes" for sacrificing half of their State of Origin payments in a move that kept an NRL-wide COVID-19 forced pay cut to just six per cent.

A competition-wide salary cut of up to 10 per cent was on the cards when the NRL opened negotiations with the NRL players association, but a six per cent pay cut over two years was finally agreed upon on Tuesday.

It means the salary cap for each NRL club will be $9.02 million this year and $9.11 million in 2022.

The figure was made possible after State of Origin players forfeited up to $45,000 each with their match payments slashed from $30,000 a match to $15,000 over the next two years. The State of Origin sacrifice amounts to a saving of $3 million over two years and has spared low income players from taking a bigger pay cut.

"It is very admirable of the representative players to take a hit so the lesser paid players aren't affected," leading player agent Steve Gillis said.

"They are the real heroes in this because the pay cuts may have been greater. A lot of goodwill has gotten this deal done. The players have already done an outstanding job to keep the game going by adhering to all the COVID protocols and restrictions. This is another sacrifice on their behalf to keep the game going." Gillis said his players were happy to do their bit to ensure the future of the NRL.

"The RLPA have done a good job representing players with the NRL," he said. "While it is unfortunate that they have had to take a pay cut we are in very difficult times." The six per cent competition wide pay cut, along with the State of Origin sacrifice, will amount to a saving of $19 million across the next two years. Clubs were originally operating with a salary cap of $10 million.

Gillis said the confirmed salary cap would not affect previous, current or future contract negotiations with players.

"We had a forecast of what it would be and have operated as per normal," Gillis said.

"This negotiation hasn't been a roadblock to deals." NRL CEO Andrew Abdo thanked the players for agreeing to the pay-cuts. "2020 proved when we do things together, we get a better outcome for everyone," Abdo said. "Today is another example of that," Abdo said. "I want to thank the players for the professionalism, discipline and sacrifices they have made - not only to ensure the 2020 season proceeded but so the game can remain -sustainable long term.

"I also want to thank (RLPA President) Clint Newton for the leadership he has shown in securing a deal that provides security for his players, the game and our joint stakeholders.

"The deal is a fair reflection of the value the players bring to our game and the sacrifices they are prepared to make to ensure we remain strong in the years ahead." In line to take a pay cut of up to $300,000 over two years, NSW forward Wade Graham described the pay-cuts as reasonable given the exceptional circumstances.

"We understand the significant impact that the COVID-19 pandemic has had on our game," he said. "To help the game recover we believe it's fair that we share in that and play our part by agreeing reasonable reductions to our payments and benefits."

EVOLUTION OF THE SALARY CAP 2012: $4.4m 2014: $5.5m 2016: $6.1m 2018: $9.1m 2020: $9.5m 2021: $9.02m 2022: $9.11m EDITORIAL PAGE 20
---
Self-isolating Bennett Zooms in on all the fun as his players let down their hair at training SIX months ago, Wayne Bennett wouldn't have known what a Zoom meeting was. Now he knows all he has to do is tap on the email link and, like magic, the game's oldest coach can be anywhere he wants.

Even when he's home sitting on the lounge.

So on Monday morning, while the NRL had banished Bennett from South Sydney's bubble, he still found a way to burst back inside the Rabbitohs' inner sanctum.

And this time he wasn't breaking COVID-19 protocols but coaching by remote. From there, Bennett took centre stage as Souths' preparations for Saturday's clash against the Cowboys swung into action.

The team meeting was scheduled to run for an hour from 9am but was a little late for obvious reasons.

Then at 10.45 the players were out on the field for about an hour of playing games. No joke, there was dodge ball and a game they call flinch (where they throw the ball and if you flinch you're out).

They also practised kicking soccer goals and finished it off by throwing 40m passes at a garbage bin.

It all looked like a lot of fun, though it was still hard to fathom how and why a professional sporting team would start its week this way.

Then it was lunch and home in time for an afternoon repeat of Australian Ninja Warrior.

Seriously, can you imagine this happening under Michael Maguire? But it wasn't as if they were all skipping out early because the boss was away. In fact, knowing when to take the foot off the throttle has always been a big part of Bennett's coaching success.

That and his ability to build relationships with his players, regardless of what those outside might be saying.

And their relationships are going to survive two weeks with a little bit of distance between them.

All coaches have different styles and it's easy to mistake Bennett's for being too lackadaisical for the modern game.

But it always has been, and remains, about how well a coach can deal with different personalities.

For instance, Greg Inglis was known to talk about what it was like playing under Tim Sheens in the Australian teams - and from breakfast Sheens would be full-on football, while all GI wanted to do was chill out.

Whereas Bennett sits down for lunch most days with the players but they rarely talk footy, just chew the fat and share a laugh.

Maguire was famous for turning up early, mostly starting his days around 5am - and it worked for him because he won a competition.

But now they are saying at the Tigers that Maguire's hard edge is burning them out.

Whereas Bennett has seven premierships and while some see his laid-back coaching as yet another sign of Bennett slowing up, he has been doing this for a long, long time.

The other factor that should not be underestimated now is that Bennett has tremendous trust in assistant Jason Demetriou.

They work great together and Demetriou often takes the lead. But Bennett doesn't have any insecurity about that because he also trusts his own ability.

And besides, Bennett was often away for a good few weeks during the middle of the season for State of Origin in his earlier years, so he knows how this works.

He will use it as a good freshen, while it gives Demetriou a chance to take on more responsibility.

Bennett makes no secret of the fact Demetriou is already involved in all the planning meetings because he will take over as the head coach at the end of next year. But for now, Bennett remains the boss, even when he's locked out of the bubble.
---
ADELAIDE is set to be confirmed as the destination for the opening game of the State of Origin series and for the first time in history, the sides may fly in and fly out on the day of the game.

Officials from Queensland and NSW met with NRL and biosecurity experts on Friday morning as they began the process of planning for the most unique series in Origin's 40-year history.

It is understood the NRL is still committed to playing the opening game of the series in Adelaide, although that will present its own set of problems and no doubt require delicate negotiations with the South Australian government over protocols for the game, as well as how many people will be permitted through the gates.

The states also need to finalise talks with the players union over squad sizes and their pay packets. The initial thought was that each state could select a squad of up to 24 players for the Origin series, although there are genuine concerns even that may not be enough.

NSW used 25 players last year and the injury rate has increased exponentially in the NRL this year, suggesting the Origin depth will be stretched over a three-game series that has been -restricted to a period of three weeks.

It would be naive to think it won't be the same through the Origin series, particularly if players are forced to make rapid-fire visits to the respective host cities due to state protocols.

The players also need to decide how they will divvy up their pay packets for the series. Origin players have traditionally received $30,000 per game but there is no doubt that figure will be slashed due to the fallout from COVID-19.

Origin sides have traditionally spent the days leading into Origin promoting the game in the local destination. There is every chance they won't be able to do that in Adelaide due to the state government protocols. Instead, they may be required to fly in on the day of the game and depart immediately after. - THE AUSTRALIAN
---
UN, China cop blame CHINA failed to contain the coronavirus "more forcefully" a year ago and the United -Nations-run World Health Organisation was too slow to declare a global emergency, -independent investigators say.

A panel of experts has -released a scathing interim -report on the response to the COVID-19 pandemic, criticising the WHO for taking until January 30 last year to declare the situation an "emergency".

The panel was formed last year after Australia and other countries called for an independent process to review the global response to the pandemic, and is led by former New Zealand prime minister Helen Clark and former Liberian president Ellen Johnson Sirleaf.

The report argued the "evidence of deficiencies in pandemic preparedness and response" called for "far-reaching change for the -future".

It confirmed "evidence from Wuhan" dating back to late December 2019 suggested that "a novel virus may be -responsible for the clinically observed cases of pneumonia of unknown origin".

However, Chinese authorities did not alert the world to this possibility at the time.

"A close reading of the chronology of the earliest events in the emergence of COVID-19 also suggests to the panel that there were lost -opportunities to apply basic public health measures (early)," the report said.

"What is clear to the panel is that public health measures could have been applied more forcefully by local and national health authorities in China in January." The panel also questioned why the WHO did not refer to the coronavirus as a "pandemic" until 11 March, and called for a major overhaul of the organisation's global alert system.

"Critical elements of the system are slow, cumbersome and indecisive," the report said.

The panel has recommended a system of "real-time" data gathering fed by local clinics and laboratories be created within "days, not weeks".

"This technical updating must be accompanied by a political step-change in the willingness of countries to hold themselves accountable for taking all necessary actions as soon as an alert is issued." The panel said the WHO had been "underpowered".

"The incentives for co-operation are too weak to ensure the effective engagement of (countries) with the inter-national system in a disciplined, transparent, account-able and timely manner," the report said.

Australia's Chief Medical Officer Professor Paul Kelly said he understood why there would be criticism of China's early actions in the pandemic, but their successful containment of the virus in Wuhan showed there was "a lot we can learn from the Chinese -response". "They had a terrible situation there, which they have been able to come through," he said.
---
TIES between Australian researchers and the Chinese military need to be stopped in the interests of national security, according to National Party Senator Matt Canavan.

He said recent reports within Australia and from around the world had raised serious concerns about co-operation with Chinese government-connected researchers.

An exclusive report in The Daily Telegraph recently outlined how China's People's Liberation Army has been involved in scientific research, co-funded by the Australian government, into the origins of the coronavirus which has been published in esteemed medical journals.

In an explosive revelation, a study co-funded by the Australian Research Council and the Chinese government, and trumpeted by The University of Sydney as helping to solve the puzzle of how COVID-19 transferred from animals to humans, relied on a key laboratory in an institute in the People's Liberation Army's Academy of Military Medical Sciences to conduct its "genetic sequencing" and "virus isolation". The director of the microbiology institute, Professor Wu-Chan Cao has the rank of colonel and is a Wuhan Institute of Virology board member. Mr Canavan told Sky News commentator Sharri Markson co-operation between Chinese government researchers and Australian scientists should be stopped. "Your reports along with several others ... over the past year have raised serious concerns about (how) the ... joint research between China and other western nations is being (used) for potentially military, counter intelligence applications and in this case, in terms, of health as well," Mr Canavan said. "I think the reports are serious enough that we should suspend research co-operation with Chinese government-connected researchers."
---
JUST WHAT DOES THE FUTURE HOLD FOR SPORT IN 2021? BUZZ ROTHFIELD PEERS INTO THE CRYSTAL BALL FOR HIS PREDICTIONS

STORM TROOPERS No Cameron Smith, no worries.

Not when you've got the best hooker in the world to replace him, the 22-year-old Harry Grant.

Of all things Storm will miss is Smith's leadership. Yet they've got the NRL's best player, Origin hero and five-eighth Cameron Munster, to steer this side around the park.

The best indication of their extraordinary strength of the park is our recent top 50 player list.

They had four in the top 12 - Cameron Munster, Ryan Papenhuyzen, Grant and Josh Addo-Carr. Plus another six - Jesse Bromwich, Jahrome Hughes, Brandon Smith, Nelson Asofa-Solomona, Christian Welch and Felise Kaufusi.

Dale Finucane and Justin Olam wouldn't have been out of place in the list either. The one query is their preparation and being ready for the opening round. Coach Craig Bellamy has given the entire squad until January 4 to return to training.

THE QUINELLA We're tipping South Sydney Rabbitohs to replace Penrith Panthers in the grand final.

You add Jai Arrow to the middle and play Cameron Murray on an edge where he is best suited. Plus they'll have Latrell Mitchell settled in at fullback and hopefully injury free.

They will want to send out the old supercoach Wayne Bennett a winner.

ORIGIN DOUBLE The 'worst Queensland team in 40 years' are a huge hope of winning back-to-back State of Origin crowns. When you add David Fifita and Kalyn Ponga to the Maroons outfit that defeated the Blues, they are going to be awfully hard to beat.

BIGGEST IMPROVER There is no question the Gold Coast Titans will be in the top eight. Any side that adds David Fifita and Tino Fa'asuamaleaui to one that won five straight at the end of the season could even be a top-four hope. Their coach Justin Holbrook, a great operator, has added highly regarded strength and conditioning coach Klint Hoare as high-performance manager.

THE SPOON We know the Broncos are going to improve under Kevin Walters and hand over the most unwanted 'prize' in the game to another club.

We're thinking the Cowboys. This is no reflection on new coach Todd Payten, who did such a wonderful job as a caretaker with New Zealand's Warriors. It's just the Cowboys showed little this year to finish 14th with just five wins under a good coach in Paul Green. They are paying $2 million from their cap on Michael Morgan and Valentine Holmes, both of whom offered little last season.

It could be a battle between the Cowboys and the Wests Tigers at the bottom. Michael Maguire won't be in a position to lift his side until big-money players Russell Packer and Moses Mbye are off contract to free up salary cap space.

HAPLESS HOOKER Damien Cook's brief Test career is under threat and through no fault of his own. Harry Grant looks like the Test hooker for the next decade. He's a phenomenal talent and a really decent young man.

AGE SHALL NOT WEARY HIM Wayne Bennett gets towards the end of next season and realises he's too young to retire and starts angling for another coaching gig. After his effort with the Maroons in State of Origin, there is interest out there for him. However, we're tipping there will be an announcement about a second Brisbane team midway through the year and Bennett will become the face of the new franchise that will be ready to play in 2023.

COMEBACK 1 Jack Bird's career has been a write-off since he joined the Broncos three years ago. A return to his junior club St George Illawarra will see Bird finally play some football and show us the player who helped the Sharks win the 2016 premiership.

COMEBACK II Ryan James' signing might prove to be the most astute for 2021. I know he's coming off serious knee injuries, but James was pushing Origin selection a few years ago at the Titans and he joins a dominant Raiders pack. A fit and firing James will be dynamic alongside Josh Papalii.

OPEN AND SHUT CASE Despite concussion issues, Will Pucovski will establish himself as David Warner's Test opening partner and the new rising star of Australian cricket. They will form a great pairing.

JOINING BRADMAN Steve Smith has 26 Test centuries and I'm backing him in to score three more and join Sir Donald Bradman on 29 this year.

RADIO ACTIVE It's a big year for rugby league radio ratings. 2GB have dominated for a long period but losing Erin Molan is a huge blow, just 12 months after Continuous Call legends Ray Hadley and Bozo Fulton pulled the pin. There's not much opposition from the ABC but there's a new player in town, SEN, plus Triple M, who had great figures in the final survey of the footy season.

OUR BEN STOKES Cameron Green has made his ODI debut, but he will really make his mark as the all-rounder Australia has craved for decades. We have looked on with envy at Ben Stokes, but Green bowls 145km/h and they say he bats like Kevin Pietersen. That's a handy combo.

BOWLED GARRY Nathan Lyon (left) could get to 400 wickets in the second Test against India, confirming his place as the second-greatest Australian spinner behind Shane Warne. Only 33, Lyon will challenge Glenn McGrath's total of 563 Test wickets.

ROAD TO REVENGE Shame we've got to wait until Round 22 to see new Dragons coach Anthony Griffin tackle the Panthers, the club that sacked him before their chairman Dave "Uncle Nick" O'Neill signed Ivan Cleary.

GO GIRLS Who would have thought female jockeys would dominate racing like Rachel King and Jamie Kah? They are both outstanding riders with the strength and skill to match their male counterparts. They will make an even bigger impact in 2021 in Sydney and Melbourne racing.

QUEEN OF POOL Our 20-year-old rising superstar Ariarne Titmus has already beaten American legend Katy Ledecky once in the 400m freestyle. Delaying the Olympics for 12 months will only mean Ariarne is stronger and hungrier to take gold.

It will be one of the great head-to-head battles in Tokyo.

THE SISTERS A hope as much as a prediction, but let's cheer on Cate and Bronte Campbell as they sign off on their Olympic careers on the dais together after the 4x100m freestyle relay, with the team defending their Rio gold.

POOL PARTY Projections in a virtual 2020 Olympics had our swimmers giving England a bath and winning close to 20 medals in the pool. Our Olympic swimming trials are in June, but it is shaping as a great Olympics for Mack Horton now that the drugs controversy finally caught up with rival Sun Yang.

BOOMERS AT LAST After finishing fourth in four previous Olympics, it's time for Patty Mills and the boys to get their hands on that elusive medal. How COVID-19 affects the NBA and the Olympics remain a mystery - but it just might play into our hands.

BOARD GAMES Surfing will be one of the most popular event for Australians as it makes its Olympic debut. My fearless prediction is Steph Gilmore and Sally Fitzgibbons will end up competing against each other for a medal.

RUNNING MATES NSW's Jessica Hull is an emerging star of Australian track and field, breaking the national 5000m record which had stood for 18 years. She also took three seconds off the 3000m national record. She will breakthrough and make the 1500m final in Tokyo. Look out for Tasmania's Stewart McSweyn as well. He is our new Craig Mottram - an Aussie who can run with the might of Africa.

FACE OF THE GAMES With Immortals Usain Bolt and Michael Phelps no longer competing, the international face of the Tokyo Olympics won't come from the track or the pool - it will be American gymnast Simone Biles. Her smile will light up the world.

NRL Bottom 8 9 Bulldogs 10 Sea Eagles 11 Sharks 12 Broncos 13 Dragons 14 Warriors 15 Wests Tigers 16 Cowboys

NRL Top 8 1 Storm 2 Rabbitohs 3 Raiders 4 Eels 5 Roosters 6 Knights 7 Panthers 8 Titans

BEST SUMMER READS Sit back, chill and enjoy some of the finest words in a fantastic line-up of sporting books.

Tough Love The inspirational story of three-time world champion boxer Lovemore Ndou. When Lovemore stopped fighting in the ring he began fighting for justice, and he is now a successful Sydney lawyer specialising in criminal law and family law.

Cameron Smith The greatest rugby league player of all-time holds nothing back in his life story that is going absolutely gangbusters on all the bookstores.

Mike Colman One of my favourite all-time sports journos. It's a fantastic read including great yarns on Richie Benaud, Darren Lockyer, Glen Boss, Eddie Jones, Wendell Sailor and Andrew Symonds.

Unforgiven - Ash GrayAsh is a sub-editor at the Daily Tele who can even turn Dean 'Bulldog' Ritchie's copy into English. His book is the untold story of the rebel West Indian players who toured apartheid South Africa 40 years ago and how it affected their lives. It has already won a squillion awards.

SHORT & SHARP ■ Boyd Cordner - story of the year ■ Wayne Bennett farewell dinner at Grappa ■ Rabs to retire ■ Joseph Suaalii Dally M rookie of the year ■ An NRL coach to be sacked by Round 12 ■ Buddy Franklin to get injured

FIGHT FEAST At least two Australian boxing world champions by the end of 2021. Tim Tszyu needs to move up a gear and challenge some of the bigger names and belt holders.

Bashing up a way-past-his-best Jeff Horn and then Kiwi Bowyn Morgan at Bankwest Stadium still leaves question marks.

There will be some other great opportunities for Aussie fighters. Andrew Moloney will surely get another crack at Joshua Franco after being robbed in Las Vegas.

His twin brother Jason was outclassed by Japan's unified bantamweight champion Naoya 'Monster' Inoue but will come back strongly.

Heavyweight Justis Huni is the most exciting of the lot. He won the Australian title in his first professional fight then demolished previously undefeated Arsene Fosso six weeks later. He has extraordinary hand speed for a big man. An Olympic gold medal and a world title fight are his goals. Jeff Fenech's classy super bantamweight Brock Jarvis is also ready to go to the next level.
---
THE COVID FILES CORONAVIRUS cases across the world could have been cut by 95 per cent if China had come clean when it first learned the disease was infectious, according to damning new research.

As international fury builds at the Chinese Communist Party's handling of the pandemic and legal challenges mount against the regime, an investigation by The Daily Telegraph shows the true impact of the cover-up.

More than 1000 Australians have now joined a global class action suing China and the lawyer leading it said yesterday Beijing's whitewash will be central to the suit, which is seeking more than $A10 trillion.

"Had they acted immediately, it would have changed the entire spectrum of the world population being affected by this," said Jeremy Alters, head strategist at Berman Law Group. "It's at least 95 per cent, because had they closed the city when they first learned about the human to human transmission … it would have bought the world somewhere between six and eight extra weeks before it ever got here.

"Six to eight extra weeks in the lifetime in which we've been living for the last three or four months is an eternity." Research by Britain's University of Southampton, to be published in the science magazine Nature in coming days, shows the spread would have been dramatically reduced if containment measures were in place before Wuhan and three other cities shut down on January 23.

Had containment strategies been implemented at the start of January, when China first hid the fact that the virus was contagious, the researchers found the spread could have been reduced by 95 per cent.

Doctors at two hospitals in Wuhan separately reported to the Chinese CDC on December 27 and 29 that the then-unnamed virus was contagious, but it wasn't until January 20, after weeks of trying to suppress the information, that the Chinese government announced this finding.

If the measures "could have been conducted one week, two weeks, or three weeks earlier in China, cases could have been reduced by 66 per cent, 86 per cent, and 95 per cent, respectively, -together with significantly -reducing the number of affected areas", says the research, which accords with several other studies.

But lead researcher Professor Andy Tatem noted the study also showed that had China delayed its January 23 quarantine for another month the outbreak would have been "about 70 times bigger than actually happened".

With the global COVID-19 infection toll approaching three million yesterday there were increasing calls to hold China accountable.

US President Donald Trump and Prime Minister Scott Morrison are among leaders demanding a probe into the pandemic origins.

US intelligence officials are investigating whether the new coronavirus came from a high-security Wuhan lab or was naturally transmitted from bats to humans.

Although conspiracists argue the virus was man-made, most scientists concur that it was biological in nature.

But this doesn't preclude the possibility the virus was being tested at the lab and -accidentally escaped.

China has repeatedly blocked efforts to investigate the virus, from disinfecting the Wuhan seafood market characterised as the inception point before any swabs could be taken, to arresting whistleblowers who tried to warn the world about what was coming.

Beijing has also orchestrated a misinformation campaign that at times has accused the US military of introducing the virus.

According to a new report by the European Union's External Action Service, China and Russia have -"targeted conspiracy narratives" to shift the blame for the outbreak.

The EU yesterday denied it had bowed to Chinese pressure to water down the disinformation report.

It followed reports that said an early version of the report referred to China running "a global disinformation campaign to deflect blame for the outbreak of the pandemic and improve its international image".

China has repeatedly -rejected calls for an independent investigation into the virus, saying it is "politically motivated".

"We are fighting the virus at the moment, we are concentrating all our efforts on fighting against the virus," top UK-based Chinese diplomat Chen Wen said this week.

"Why talk about an investigation into this? This will divert not only attention, it will divert resources." Bondi local Daniel Rowntree (pictured above) is one of more than 5600 Australians who have recovered from coronavirus and, like many, wants answers as to how it started so it can't happen again. He supports calls for an -independent international review that considers how China's Communist Party leadership responded in the early days.

"I believe in a review process to see that the same mistakes are not repeated," Mr Rowntree said He believes the cases were so widespread in China the fact was that the "horse had already bolted" at the time COVID-19 was in the international spotlight. "By the time they realised it was a pandemic, it was too late."

Timeline of how China masked the impact of the coronavirus outbreak" NOV 17: "China's first case of COVID-19 reported, but not made public until March.

DEC 10:"Wei Guixian, a seafood merchant in Wuhan's Huanan wet-market, becomes sick.

DEC 20: A total of 60 cases of COVID-19 were recorded in China. DEC 27:" Wuhan doctor Zhang Jixian warns authorities of a new contagious disease affecting 180 patients.

DEC 26-30:" Multiple Chinese genomics companies are sent evidence of a new virus from the Wuhan patient data.

DEC 31:"Chinese officials alert the World Health Organisation's China office of an outbreak of pneumonia with an unknown cause in Wuhan. Internet authorities begin stripping posts from social media that include the terms "Wuhan unknown pneumonia," "SARS variation," "Wuhan seafood market".

JAN 1:"The health commission in China's Hubei province orders a genomics company to stop all testing and destroy samples of the new coronavirus.

Wuhan police bring in for questioning eight doctors who had warned about the new virus via social media in late December.

JAN 2:"The government-run Wuhan Institute of Virology identifies coronavirus and maps its genetic sequence but doesn't publicly announce the findings.

JAN 3:"The National Health Commission issues a gag order directing all virus samples be moved to designated state testing facilities or destroyed. Institutions are also ordered to not publish any research or information about the disease.

JAN 5: "Researchers in Shanghai map the coronavirus genome and hand the data to Beijing, urging that control measures be introduced.

JAN. 6:"China's CDC activates emergency response; not publicly announced. JAN 7:"President Xi Jinping takes charge of response; not publicly disclosed until February.

JAN 9: Chinese officials and the World Health Organisation announce a cluster of pneumonia cases in Wuhan.

JAN 10:"Chinese government expert Wang Guangfa describes the Wuhan pneumonia as "under control" and a "mild condition" on state television.

JAN 11:"Frustrated that their work to map the genome hasn't yet been released by the government, Shanghai researchers publicly release the sequence.

JAN 12:"Shanghai authorities close the lab for official "rectification". JAN 14:"The WHO announces for the first time there may be "limited" person-to-person transmission.

JAN 15:"Chinese CDC emergency centre Li Qun claims on state TV the risk of transmission is low.

JAN 18:"Tens of thousands of families in Wuhan turn out for a "potluck" banquet to celebrate Lunar New Year, encouraged by authorities to try to attempt to break a world record.

JAN 20:"As President Xi makes a first public statement about the outbreak, he avoids mentioning human-to-human transmission. It is left to government task force chief Zhong Nanshan to announce the same day that the virus is being spread person-to-person.JAN 23:"Chinese authorities finally lock down Wuhan, but not before allowing 5 million to flee the city without screening.
---
Premier dumps ANZ Stadium rebuild but stands firm on Powerhouse

PREMIER Gladys Berejiklian has abandoned the promised $810 million rebuild of Sydney's Olympic stadium at Homebush, a victim of the state's COVID-19 financial disaster.

Instead the NSW government has announced a new $3 billion fund for job-creating projects across the state to generate an extra 20,000 positions.

The promised $1.1 billion Powerhouse Museum move to Parramatta will still be delivered, however ANZ Stadium will remain untouched.

ANZ was to be converted into a 70,000-seat state-of-the-art venue with a rectangular playing field to host Sydney's showpiece major events including State of Origin, NRL grand finals, international sporting events and rock concerts.

The $3 billion infrastructure and job fund will be used for smaller, shovel-ready projects "touching every corner of the state," according to the government.

The Premier said the moves would fire up the economy with $100 billion now being invested in the state's infrastructure.

"This guaranteed pipeline of $100 billion will be our best chance of supporting the hundreds of thousands of people who have already lost their jobs in NSW," Ms Berejiklian said.

"We are now not only guaranteeing our infrastructure pipeline, we will be looking for opportunities to fast-track projects to provide jobs as early as we can." The government said the ANZ Stadium rebuild was originally a sensible project backed by the people of NSW at last year's election, but was abandoned because of the current health and economic climate.

The Powerhouse Museum relocation will create more than 1100 construction jobs in Western Sydney, 2400 indirect jobs and keep hundreds employed once it opens.

Deputy Premier John Barilaro said the fast-tracking of projects would support jobs across NSW and the government was in the process of identifying them.

"The communities of NSW have been through an incredibly tough period with continued drought, horrific bushfires and now COVID-19 and the best path to recovery is creating jobs," Mr Barilaro said.

"An unprecedented crisis calls for an unprecedented recovery and redirecting funding from Stadium Australia to job-creating infrastructure builds is the right thing to do for the people of NSW." The ANZ Stadium decision leaves Sydney without a major event venue to match Perth's new Optus Stadium, Adelaide Oval or Suncorp Stadium in Brisbane. SYDNEY'S NRL GRAND FINAL NOW IN DOUBT - WHAT'S THE BUZZ, PAGE 45
---
In March last year, then-US President Donald Trump was asked why he referred to the China virus as the China virus.

"Because it comes from China," Trump replied. "That's why. I want to be accurate." Accuracy is less important, however, to President Joe Biden. Trump's successor has decided that references to the coronavirus's site of origin puts "Asian-American and Pacific Islander persons, families, communities and businesses at risk".

And so Biden has banned use of the phrase "China virus" by government representatives.

"The federal government must recognise that it has played a role in furthering these xenophobic sentiments through the actions of political leaders," Biden announced, "including references to the COVID-19 pandemic by the geographic -location of its origin." Presumably Biden will also outlaw the term "UK variant" to describe a mutated form of the coronavirus. He may also need to correct New York Governor Andrew Cuomo, who labels COVID as a "European virus". Obsessive worry over racial issues is an American disease.
---
THE South Sydney Rabbitohs will slowly ease old super coach Wayne Bennett out of -recruitment negotiations.

The seven-time premiership-winning coach enticed Queensland Origin forward Jai Arrow to join the club next season but it will probably be the last deal he does.

Bennett is moving on when his contract expires after next season and there is a long history of players often following him when he switches clubs. Last year centre James Roberts and edge forward Jaydn Su'A came from the Broncos to join him at the Rabbitohs. He also tried to bring budding Brisbane superstar David Fifita to Redfern.

When Bennett left St George Illawarra in 2010 to join the Newcastle Knights, he took Darius Boyd, Alex McKinnon and Adam Cuthbertson. Jeremy Smith came a year later.

From Newcastle back to the Broncos, he took Boyd and Travis Waddell. The Rabbitohs are in negotiations with Blues Origin star Cameron Murray - their future captain. They want him off the market -before he can talk to rivals in November.

His negotiations are being handled by football general manager Mark Ellison, chief executive Blake Solly and Jason Demetriou after the departure of Shane Richardson.

At some stage, assistant coach Demetriou will have to get even more involved because he takes over from Bennett in 2022.

Souths are also keen to lock down teenage sensation Joseph Suaalii, rated by many as the best 16-year-old footballer in the country and a future Greg Inglis.

Laurie's pride and joy for daughter FOOTY legend Laurie Daley says he has had fewer prouder moments in his life. Last week his daughter, Jaimee, graduated from the Goulburn Police Academy a probationary constable.

Daley's family couldn't attend the graduation due of COVID-19 restrictions, but there was no prouder parent in the country.

"Any time your kids achieve something like this, it's very special," Daley said. "She's excited but I'm a bit nervous. She's worked very hard to get there - like all police graduates - and I'm really proud."
---
THE COVID-19 lockdown is set to deliver an unexpected bonus to NSW's premier club competition with Waratahs players to feature in this year's revamped Shute Shield competition and be available for two State of Origin-style representative fixtures.

Availability will depend on how the international season shapes up but with the domestic Australian Super Rugby competition finishing on September 19 and the first Wallabies Test of the year not expected until October 3 or 10, some, if not all, of the state's best players will be back playing club rugby before the end of the year.

Waratahs players are currently banned from training with clubs under the agreed biosecurity measures to ensure Super rugby goes ahead next month but Sydney Rugby Union president Phil Parsons expects the stars will be allowed to return later in the season.

"There's no doubt that we're going to see many of the Waratahs turning out for their clubs at the end of our season, which is just going to be fantastic for the game and the competition," Parsons told The Saturday Telegraph.

"There's every chance you might even see Michael Hooper running out for Manly." Both Penrith and Newcastle have been added to the 13-team Shute Shield competition this season, which will kick off on Saturday July 18 and be played over 13 rounds, followed by a three-week finals series culminating with the grand final to be played under lights on October 31.

If the Waratahs don't make the playoffs, players could be available for Shute Shield as early as round eight while, if NSW makes the final, their latest return would be round 11.

Either way, their return to club rugby would be a massive boost for a competition that has enjoyed a huge resurgence of interest as fans who have become increasingly disillusioned with the professional game return to grassroots. Parsons said talks were continuing about a broadcast deal for the season and he was optimistic of a good deal, while it can be revealed officials are also looking at adding two representative matches for Shute Shield players - a city v country fixture and a country of origin match between Pacific Island heritage players and the rest of the world.
---
HUNT FOR THE CURE

GERM detectives and scientists have uncovered genetic mutations in coronavirus clusters circulating throughout Australia, giving them a chance to move a step ahead of the disease.

The breakthrough by Doherty Institute scientists and Victorian Department of Health contact tracers is vital to limiting the spread of community transmission of COVID-19.

By tracking the different mutations, specialists cannot only pinpoint the country a person's individual coronavirus infection originated from, but home in on the hospital, aged care centre, cruise or other local source they are linked to.

Armed with the new genomic sequencing, Associate Professor Deborah Williamson said contact tracers around Australia could identify everyone likely to be linked to a cluster, even if they did not have symptoms.

The genetic information also provides a clue where each cluster is likely to spread next, allowing more targeted isolation to stop each COVID-19 outbreak - which is needed to ease wider restrictions on the entire population.

"We are seeing clusters related to different outbreaks in different parts of the world," Assoc Prof Williamson said.

"The benefits are going to be in monitoring things like outbreaks in hospitals, outbreaks in aged care facilities, and looking at potential community transmission.

"If we did find there was an outbreak in a certain part of the community, then they could direct resources to that such as contact tracing, testing of those in that risk network." The Melbourne-based Doherty Institute is at the forefront of global efforts to find a COVID-19 cure. While its genomic sequencing will not overcome the virus, combining the information with the epidemiological work of contact tracers could be a key to restoring freedoms.

The findings are also being shared with scientists around the world to further research, as well as increase the data available to Australian trace detectives. After identifying subtle differences hidden among the 30,000 characters in the genetic code of two coronavirus clusters circulating in Victoria, contact tracing detectives have already used the genomic sequencing technique to stop each spreading in recent weeks.

The Institute's scientists have now pored over samples from hundreds of COVID-19 patients to genetically sequence each person's infection, identifying telltale mutations in coronavirus imported from each country.

Despite the slowing curve, Australia's COVID-19 peak is still possibly ahead and Assoc Prof Williamson said it was vital all states began collecting samples to build up a complete set of sequencing before community transmission took off.

With a full set of sequencing data, any new cases emerging in the community could be instantly traced back to their origins to identify others unknowingly caught up in the cluster, or those who are about to be if they are not isolated.

"It's no good sequencing a few genomes just from one hospital, or from one outbreak. To get a proper handle on what's going on we need to be sequencing all of the genomes not just in Victoria, but in all of Australia," Assoc Prof Williamson said.

While genome sequencing has been used in Victoria to trace the source and get ahead of well-established infectious diseases such as salmonella and tuberculosis for the past five years, identifying COVID-19 mutations has been much more difficult for scientists around the globe.

Because the novel coronavirus only emerged four months ago its mutations have not had long to separate to a point where they are easily distinguishable.

But using powerful computers to overlay hundreds of samples from COVID-19 patients highlighted the smallest differences in the nucleotides of the RNA genome in patients already known to belong to certain clusters, providing a framework to identify related cases.

The COVID-19 mutations identified so far are not thought to provide an indication of the severity of each strain, but Assoc Prof Williamson said work was continuing to identify more differences as well as their role.

"It's easy to forget that four-and-a-half months ago we didn't even know this thing existed," she said.

"We are trying to cram years of expertise and knowledge into a few short months. "Every day we are learning something new about not just a virus, but ways to detect the virus, ways to control the outbreak."

NATIONAL COVID-19 HOT SPOTS WHERE GENOME MUTATION TRACKING COULD STOP THE SPREAD QUEENSLAND ■ North Brisbane 309 ■ South Brisbane 239 ■ Gold Coast 188 ■ Sunshine Coast 89

NSW ■ Blacktown 106 ■ Byron Bay 16 ■ Cumberland 66 ■ Tamworth 12 ■ Sydney Eastern Suburbs 261 ■ Penrith 10 ■ Lake Macquarie 54 ■ Ryde 66

ACT ■ Tuggeranong 23 ■ South Canberra 17 ■ Gungahlin 17

TASMANIA ■ North West Tasmania 97

VICTORIA ■ Stonnington 87 ■ Banyule 82 ■ Greater Geelong 62 ■ Melbourne 61

SOUTH AUSTRALIA ■ Barossa Valley 40 ■ Adelaide Airport 34

WESTERN AUSTRALIA ■ Greater Perth region 403 ■ Broome 11 ■ Albany 7 ■ Kalgoorlie 6 ■ Halls Creek 4

DEFINITION The case definition of a confirmed case is a person who tests positive to a validated specific SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid test or has the virus identified by electron microscopy or viral culture, at a reference laboratory. The details on source of infection are subject to change as public health investigations and case interviews are ongoing.

GENOMICSGenomics is the study of whole genomes of organisms. It analyses the building blocks of cells such as DNA and RNA through sequencing to decode the fundamental structure and function of genomes. Genomic research has already been used to develop better understanding, tracking and defences against bacteria and viruses including meningococcal disease, salmonella, tuberculosis and cytomegalovirus, a member of the herpes family. Decoding can reveal mutations and allow scientists to act quickly to identify and isolate the source of the disease.
---
NRL 360 host PAUL KENT revisits his fearless predictions counting down to the 2020 season reboot

EELS BRAD Arthur has assembled himself a formidable team this year and now, with a dream draw, the Eels are poised to make a comfortable run into the top four. They retain their home ground and play many "away" games at home, too. The Eels play twice only Manly and Brisbane from last year's top eight.

Inside the club, Reagan Campbell-Gillard and Ryan Matterson finish off the team list nicely. Campbell-Gillard is a State of Origin-calibre prop and the Eels got him for a song, while the younger Matterson is a strong chance to push his way into the Blues' squad this season. Around that the Eels' pack is tough. Add the raw power Maika Sivo and Blake Ferguson bring to the edges, combined with Waqa Blake and Michael Jennings, will terrify the opposition. Then you add Clint Gutherson, Mitch Moses and the game's rising star, Dylan Edwards. If Moses can continue to improve and be more consistent, the Blue and Gold Army is in for a ride.

Prediction: 1st (3rd pre-COVID-19)

STORM YOU can't help but be full of admiration for the way Melbourne manage to be competitive season after season. Cameron Smith again remains the key and, so long as he is on the field, Melbourne are always a chance to do something great. Halfback remains a key position and again it looks like coach Craig Bellamy will take a cautious approach. Jahrome Hughes seems set to get first crack but Ryley Jacks and, later in the season, Cooper Johns will compete for the role. The blessing is they will play behind a powerful pack. The worry for Melbourne is a tough draw, playing four of last year's top eight twice, with the other team they play twice the improved Newcastle.

Prediction: 2nd (4th pre-COVID-19)

RAIDERS THE Raiders have the worst home ground advantage of any club, and will work under the worst possible conditions of any of the 16 NRL clubs. They having to bus nearly three hours to every "home" game, or fly, and then return that night making recovery challenging. It might begin to tell as the season goes deep. There were good signs in how they began the season, though. George Williams is a solid recruitment and was highly impressive in the opening two games, fitting quickly into his role. Like Josh Hodgson, will run the team, he could be a better signing than many anticipated and he will love the new six again rule.

Prediction: 3rd (2nd pre-COVID-19)

ROOSTERS THE Roosters have the challenge ahead they might need. Forget about three in a row. They have a tough draw, playing four of last year's top eight twice, and must come from a winless opening to the season. The battle for the Roosters will be to give the start they have and make the top four, all in a shortened season. Still, the Roosters have done a magnificent job assembling this roster and nothing has changed there. The premiers have lost Cooper Cronk and Latrell Mitchell but still have the strongest talent pool in the competition. Kyle Flanagan comes in at halfback, Josh Morris is a shrewd buy, while James Tedesco is the best player in the competition and still has improvement in him, as does Luke Keary at No.6.

Prediction: 4th (1st pre-COVID-19)

SEA EAGLES DES Hasler did a tremendous job last year to take the completely overlooked Sea Eagles to the finals and they started this season just as impressively. So don't expect anything to be different this season. Hasler realised his pack was as good as any - Marty Taupau and Addin Fonua-Blake are two of the best yardage props in the game and unheralded edge forwards. Then you add Jake Trbojevic as the third middle forward. With Daly Cherry-Evans and Tom Trbojevic creating opportunities in the backs, the Sea Eagles are in a good place. Hasler has re-energised the club. The players are fit and enthusiastic, which creates its own energy inside the club confines. The big concern is the lack of a recognised dummy-half.

Prediction: 5th (5th pre-COVID-19)

PANTHERS THE Panthers looked strong in their opening two games but have had a few hiccups during isolation. It remains to be seen how it affects them, keeping in mind how problems during last year's pre-season created a hangover coach Ivan Cleary later admitted they struggled to recover from. The Panthers seemed strong in their opening two games, with Nathan Cleary particularly impressive. With James Maloney no longer there to lead the team Cleary seamlessly stepped into the role and showed he was the leader many believed he was capable of becoming. If they get it right they have the potential to go deep. Api Koroisau is a good foil and there is good depth in the forwards.

Prediction: 6th (7th pre-COVID-19)

RABBITOHS LITTLE has changed in the Rabbitohs' brief since COVID-19 - I'm still not sure about the Rabbitohs this season. They have possibly the best spine in the competition - and Latrell Mitchell, Cody Walker, Adam Reynolds and Damien Cook are certain to drive many wins - and many are expecting the new six-again rule to benefit nobody more than it will Cook. But already the Bunnies have lost James Roberts for an undetermined period while pressure remains on Mitchell. He failed to finish his opening two games at fullback and coach Wayne Bennett has insisted Mitchell will start at fullback when the comp resumes but, tellingly, Bennett did not say how many minutes he would play there. Souths teammates have been impressed with his efforts since he returned to training, which is a good sign.

Prediction: 7th (6th pre-COVID-19)

BRONCOS THE Broncos started impressively and sparked a lot of hope for their fans. The big question for Brisbane: can they win the premiership with a halfback who the Storm thought was incapable of winning them a premiership? Showing good signs early, Brodie Croft proved himself a highly suitable role player in the Broncos system, and benefited playing behind the most exciting forward pack in the competition. David Fifita and Payne Haas both began strongly and the time off has helped Matt Lodge.

Prediction: 8th (10th pre-COVID-19)

KNIGHTS ADAM O'Brien is a quality signing for the Knights and saw in their opening two games how much of a difference he has made. The Knights look almost a different side defensively. How Newcastle navigate through the new ruck interpretations could be crucial to their season. It's still all a learning process for the Knights, making O'Brien the perfect appointment. There's a bright crop of young players coming through and a handy group of young and talented NRL players about to make the transition into quality, seasoned rep players. Most notably Kalyn Ponga, who will benefit enormously from O'Brien's arrival.

Prediction: 9th (8th pre-COVID-19)

SHARKS I'M worried about the Sharks. Andrew Fifita had knee troubles most of the summer which threatened to limit his season and which have already impacted, again, on his enforced rest from COVID-19. Fifita came back underdone, highlighting the concern the Sharks have for their big prop. There are also concerns over whether Matt Moylan is in good enough shape to play 80 minutes at fullback after battling a hamstring issue during pre-season, but the break has done him good. The break, combined with Josh Morris's release, has also seen Josh Dugan return from his weird place and hopefully ready to fire. Welcome back, Josh.

Prediction: 10th (11th pre-COVID-19)

WESTS TIGERS I LIKED everything I heard out of the Tigers over the summer but the round-two defeat to Newcastle was disappointing. It was the kind of loss coach Michael Maguire cannot tolerate, a team that lost its shape and lost resilience. I still believe the Tigers will be tough and competitive and in better shape than most of their opponents but the concern remains the roster. Hiccups in recruitment have meant the only big signing is the erratic Joey Leilua, who generally wins the game for you or loses it. Ryan Matterson is a big loss, and Robbie Farah has retired. If anything, the COVID-19 break has given Luke Brooks time to recover from injury and now he won't miss anywhere near as many games as he was going to.

Prediction 11th (13th pre-COVID-19)

COWBOYS VALENTINE Holmes was everything the Cowboys hoped for since arriving in Townsville; a strong trainer, the complete professional, and the touch of quality to ignite their attack. But his opening two games showed it will be some time before he is at the same level of form he was in the NRL when he left. The Cowboys were disappointing against Brisbane and unimpressive beating Canterbury. They got a boost with the new draw, not having to play any of last year's top four teams more than once. They also get to play at home, which will become a valuable asset for those teams who can.

Prediction: 12th (9th pre-COVID-19)

BULLDOGS THE big news for Bulldogs fans is the COVID-19 delay has allowed time for Kieran Foran to recover from shoulder surgery and, if not available for the Dogs' first game, it won't be long. In this way, no team has benefited from the suspended competition like the Bulldogs. Having said that, the work is still ahead of them. It was troubling to rank the Bulldogs so low based on what Dean Pay is doing at the club, and in light of last year's finish to the season with seven wins from their final 10 games. But the Dogs are still restricted by salary cap troubles and it will be several seasons yet before they are in a position to recruit their way up the ladder. However, they are buying in to Pay's coaching, as evidenced by last year's finish, and there is an expectation the Bulldogs will improve again this season. It might not always show up in the results but, certainly, the performance. Canterbury's biggest problem is the young age of their spine. By NRL standards, those players are still learning the game.

Prediction: 13th (14th pre-COVID-19)

WARRIORS THE Warriors have suffered several worrying injuries to their middle forwards during their isolation camp. So much, a quiet SOS has gone out throughout the league given isolation laws have made it tough to replace them. By basing themselves in Australia, unable to return home, the Warriors will do it tougher than any Australian-based NRL team and the trick will be how they accept it. They could turn the camp atmosphere into a call to arms or they could slowly become homesick and disinterested. Attitude has always been the club's problem in seasons gone by, but this time it is for different reasons.

Prediction: 14th (15th pre-COVID-19)

DRAGONS THE Dragons were extremely disappointing in their opening two games. Both were winnable and, in a worrying reflection of the team, they found a way to lose both. I expected immediate improvement from the Dragons but saw little of it. Based on the opening games, their defence is the worst in the NRL. I thought Shane Flanagan's appointment as an assistant and his ability to get the entire team buying in to a defensive system would provide immediate benefit. The lack of it shows how much work still must be done. Beyond that, the Dragons' biggest worry is their strength in the outside backs and their ability to score points. They will improve, but it will come too late in the season to make the playoffs.

Prediction: 15th (12th pre-COVID-19)

TITANS ASH Taylor's return to the Titans this year, and the positive vibes coming from him, are a strong sign for the Titans, and he seemed to be in good shape in the Titans' opening two games. Already we have seen new coach Justin Holbrook's effect on the club. Over the summer he broke the Titans down to bare essentials before trying to rebuild their game and the first two games seemed to reveal a more structured, more solid and trustworthy Gold Coast outfit. It's what needs to be done but they also need a plan that is built on patience. Holbrook's next job is to get a few of those highly paid players to begin justifying their price tags. Prediction: 16th (16th pre-COVID-19)
---
Beijing's gutter social media play is provocative - and it means to be. They want to use outrage over alleged war crimes to divide our politics and society against itself Here's a little thought experiment for you: If Chinese special forces were accused of committing war crimes overseas, do you think Beijing would investigate the matter and then issue a very public and highly embarrassing report -revealing their misdeeds for all the world to see?

Of course not.

Indeed it's tempting, given the country's behaviour from Xinjiang to Hong Kong, to say they'd probably give the troops in question a medal.

Which makes yesterday's tweet heard 'round the world all the more galling. The idea that China - China! - of all nations would suddenly decide to come across as peacenik as a bearded old crusty selling Green Left Weekly is just too much to bear.

In Yiddish, the word is chutzpah - often jokingly described as what someone has who kills their parents, then throws themselves on the mercy of the court on account of being an -orphan.

And that's about the sum of it.

Because how else can you look at a nation whose totalitarian government maintains concentration camps, uses political prisoners for slave labour, and so much besides criticising Australia for bad behaviour?

Of course no nation is perfect, but the cognitive dissonance is almost too much to bear.

The tweet in question, sent by one of China's chief "wolf warrior" diplomats, was so over the top that it is almost sure to cause a miscalculation and an over-reaction.

Coming from the account of -Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian, it read, "shocked by murder of Afghan civilians & prisoners by Australian soldiers …. we strongly condemn such acts, & call for holding them accountable".

To drive the point home, Zhao included a fake photo of an Australian soldier holding a knife to a child's throat over an Afghan flag.

Its sheer ballsiness was calculated pitch-perfectly to offend the government's honour, provoke reaction, and (this is the real trap) wedge the Australian electorate into two camps.

The aim, from Beijing's point of view, is to shift attention from Australians' increasingly bipartisan anger at their economic bullying and divide the country roughly into two camps: On the one side the China hawks, mostly on the right, who think we should keep going hard in our dealings with the CCP and give them no quarter.

And on the other, the doves, whose instincts are to think that if we've got a problem with another nation, it's probably our fault, and who tend to hold common cause with an Australian left that's happy to see anyone take the near-sacred place of Australia's military down a peg.

This faction has been increasingly in evidence as things have heated up between our two nations.

Last week commentators on the left were quick to blame the Morrison government's diplomacy, and not China's claims against Australia's sovereignty, for increased tariffs on Australian wine.

If we'd just given in, everything would be fine, is the implication. The same goes for those who say we should never have taken the lead on demanding an investigation of the origins of the COVID-19 pandemic.

You can understand how China might think they'd get what they think is a fair hearing in some quarters here.

As a strategy it's a direct echo of the old Soviet Union which, during the Cold War, sought to distract attention from its own human rights horror show by pointing to America's civil rights dramas and the plight of Blacks living in the inner city.

After all, they would ask, how can you complain about gulags when there are ghettos just down the road from the White House?

There's an added bonus, too, for Beijing: The tweet is a real turnabout on China's long, ongoing complaint that Western nations like Australia need to stop judging their human rights record by our standards.

"How do you like them apples?", Zhao's tweet all but taunts. That's why we need to be careful.

Scott Morrison was absolutely right to fire up about the issue. His description of the tweet as "repugnant" doesn't begin to plumb its raw grossness, but his statement that China should be "totally ashamed" will get him nowhere with a communist dictatorship that is entirely shameless.

Likewise, it was heartening to see Labor rise to the occasion and similarly condemn China.

But just as a small child feels power in pushing his parents' buttons and making them lose their temper, so too will Beijing delight in Australia's rage. Particularly given that Beijing has spent the last year in a spluttering temper against Australia.

That's why, if China has decided that it wants to play at the table of human rights, we should take them at their word.

This doesn't mean directing -Foreign Minister Marise Payne to wear out her thumbs tweeting abuse at Beijing.

But it does mean that we can say, fine, we are not perfect, but that we would put our human rights record up against China's any day of the week.

Here the government can calmly and rationally address the -nation and the world and say things too many people don't like to hear, despite there being clear proof for anyone who cares to look for it.

Things such as China harvests -organs. And China maintains concentration camps. And China uses slave labour. And China takes hostages.

And that China has its sights set on dominating Taiwan and the Pacific, and it will be very bad news for Australia if their plans come off.

Indeed, the consequences will be far harsher than mean tweets or more expensive consumer goods. And it's a question of pay now, or pay later.
---
NO other side best epitomises how gruelling the COVID--affected season has been than the Sydney Roosters.

Coach Trent Robinson had nine first-choice NRL players in the stand at WIN Stadium but the back-to-back premiers found a way to defeat St George Illawarra in Wollongong on Thursday night.

With Victor Radley, Sam Verrills, Brett Morris, Josh Morris, Kyle Flanagan, Boyd Cordner, Angus Crichton, Daniel Tupou and Jared Waerea-Hargreaves all unavailable, Robinson was left with a bench that had 34 games of NRL experience.

While the Roosters were missing the physical manpower, mentally he was able to field a team of 17 players who know how to win.

"The club gets used to winning, that happens, and in times of need it's still a winning mentality," Phil Gould said.

Dragons backrower Jackson Ford could be in some trouble with the match review committee after he was placed on report for a trip on Roosters playmaker Luke Keary.

"He has to be (on report), he should be off," Gould said. "That's the one that used to be a send-off ... this is the one where he can't get to it with his hand so he throws out the leg."

BUBBLE BURST The NRL's COVID-19 bubble burst on Thursday. Dragons forward Paul Vaughan was forced to sit out last night's clash after it was revealed he breached the game's strict biosecurity protocols.

Vaughan visited an Illawarra cafe for breakfast on game day and will have to self-isolate for the next 14 days. The Dragons sorely missed their key man and the go-forward he provides in the middle.

South Sydney coach Wayne Bennett was also caught in a COVID bubble drama and will be forced to self-isolate for 14 days.

FULLBACK DUEL The Dragons' pre-season started with a duel between Zac Lomax and Matt Dufty, coach Paul McGregor favouring Lomax in the No.1 jumper to start the year.

But that lasted one match and Dufty was reinstated at fullback and Lomax shifted into centre. The move has produced 20 tries this season and Lomax's form has thrust him into the State of Origin conversation.

"The strength and surge about him close to the line, his defence is so strong ... there are parts of his game when you see Origin -moments in him," Gould said.

The rising back scored two tries last night, while his effort in the kick chase and defence was as impressive.

"That was a try-saver there from Zac Lomax ... are you watching Bradley?" Gould said to NSW Blues coach Brad Fittler in commentary.

DEFENCE V DEFENCE It took the Roosters 90 seconds to crack a flimsy Dragons defence. The Dragons coughed up the ball in the first set and the punishment was immediate. Centre Joey Manu made easy work of the Red V's goal-line defence, which Gould said had little intent.

"There was no impetus in their physical contact whatsoever, they are moving backwards on their line," he said.

"For the Roosters, their defensive line is so well organised. On every play their spaces are even and ready to go. If you look at the Dragons, they are never ready to. There is a big difference between the two teams."

MILESTONE MEN The reliable Mitch Aubusson ran out on to WIN Stadium to join an illustrious group of NRL players who have played 300 games.

So it was only fitting the one-club veteran bagged a four-pointer. And it was Lachlan Lam, starting his second game, who created the opportunity for Aubusson on the left edge.

Superstar Roosters fullback James Tedesco played his 150th game since his debut in 2012.

ROOSTERS 24 DRAGONS 16 ROOSTERS Tries: J Manu 2, M Aubusson, S Tupouniua, L Keary Goals: Taukeiaho 2 DRAGONS Tries: Z Lomax 2, M Dufty Goals: Z Lomax 2
---
WHO TAKES BEIJING'S SIDE IN HASTY COVID INQUIRY 5 years Length of Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sex Abuse 10 months Length of Warren Commission investigation into JFK's assassination 12 days World Health Organisation on-ground team's investigation into the origins of COVID-19 pandemic THE World Health Organisation's hurried report into the origins of the coronavirus was slammed as an "unsatisfactory" whitewash designed to protect the Chinese government from embarrassment, just hours after handing down its findings.

Speaking in China on Tuesday night, WHO investigators dismissed the possibility that the virus may have escaped from the controversial Wuhan Institute of Vir-ology while leaving the door open to the possibility that the virus may have been imported from another country.

Peter Embarek, one of the scientists who made up the delegation, said finding the origin of COVID was a "work in progress".

But he said COVID-19 most likely made the jump to humans through an unknown animal source.

The theory that the virus may have escaped from a local lab where scientists were known to be conducting "gain of function" tests on -viruses similar to the coronavirus was dismissed out of hand as "extremely unlikely", according to Embarek.

But more needs to be known before the possibility can be dismissed, according to a number of scientists and experts critical of China's handling of the pandemic.

"It's unsatisfactory, dismissing possibilities without providing evidence for why," said vaccine researcher Prof Nikolai Petrovski, who is the Director of Endocrinology at Flinders University Medical Centre in South Australia.

"They seem to have signed up to the Chinese government's position, which is that this didn't come from China, and that it might have come in to China on frozen food packaging. Why are they -saying that and what is the evidence?" "We are entitled to the facts they are using to dismiss different possibilities, and to know if they have dealt with the question marks around how the virus got this feature or that feature." Others were similarly sceptical.

"The WHO mission is compromised because Beijing is choreographing the team's visit. And the delegation -includes some China apologists," academic and author Clive Hamilton, who has written a number of books detailing the efforts of the Chinese Communist Party to subvert democracy in Australia and around the world, told The Daily Telegraph.

"It already looks like the WHO delegation is following Beijing's script." UNSW Professor Raina MacIntyre also said it was "expected" the WHO investigators would rule out the lab as where COVID-19 started, but that didn't mean it was the case.

"They do not provide any evidence for dismissing a lab leak," she said. Since the beginning of the pandemic, the Chinese government has tightly controlled information about the virus that could be embarrassing to the authoritarian regime, and suggested the virus might have been brought to Wuhan by visiting American military athletes or even on the surface of imported frozen food packaging.

China has also sought to punish Australian exporters by imposing billions of dollars worth of trade sanctions in retaliation for the Morrison government's pressing for an investigation into the -pandemic.

Nationals Senator Matt Canavan lashed the process, suggesting that any report into the virus delivered on Chinese soil was immediately compromised.

"It's a bit hard to believe the conclusions of this report when if the WHO had made certain findings, they may have been detained before -getting out of the country," he said.

"If journalists expressing views aren't safe in China, how can you expect health officials to be safe either?" Other Coalition MPs were just as scathing, with one -telling The Daily Telegraph it was "premature" to rule out the lab hypothesis "before they have found clear evidence of an alternative cause".

From the start, the WHO's investigation has been marred by controversy, with the Chinese government first delaying authorisation for the visit, and then tightly man-aging access for the inter-national delegation.

Despite the WHO's report, the theory that COVID-19's origins lie behind the gates of the secretive Wuhan Institute of Virology have gained currency in -recent days after being widely rubbished as a Donald Trump-style conspiracy theory when The Daily Telegraph reported on it last year.  Last week, the Washington Post published a blistering editorial saying that "the possibility of a laboratory -accident or leak … must be -investigated ... Wuhan (has) at least six facilities with BSL-3 laboratories for handling infectious agents," the paper's editorial board wrote. And, soon after the WHO handed down its report, former US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo told Fox News in an interview: "I continue to know that there was significant evidence that this may well have come from that -laboratory."
---
Thurston finally reveals shock family bombshell

RUGBY league legend Johnathan Thurston has revealed how his life changed forever after learning his mother was part of the stolen generation.

In an emotional insight into his upbringing, the retired NRL star has told for the first time how he was unaware of his mother's trauma until 10 years ago.

The former North Queensland Cowboys and Queensland Origin captain said the revelation was the "missing piece in the puzzle of my life" and its defining turning point.

"I went to a school that had a large population of Aboriginal kids, so I wasn't aware of the racism that my elders had faced (growing up)," Thurston said. "It wasn't until I did a bit of research on our family history. My dad is Kiwi and my mum is Aboriginal, so they copped a fair bit of backlash.

"I didn't experience any form of that racism as a kid. Mum's family were removed from their mum and dad at a young age. I wasn't aware of that until probably 10 years ago.

"No doubt they (parents) sheltered our family from their upbringing and tried to provide a life for us that was better than what they had." Speaking on a new weekly podcast Bounce Back, sponsored by DrinkWise and -hosted by Dr Andrew Rochford, Thurston said it was a culmination of wanting to learn about his family history during the NRL's annual Indigenous All Stars match in 2010 and his arrest for public drunkenness later that year, which led him towards understanding more about his culture.

"We did an exercise with Dr Chris Sarra (ahead of the All Stars match) who said: 'if you know much about your family history stand at this end of the room and if you don't know much about your family history stand at the opposite end of the room'," Thurston said.

"I always knew my mum grew up in Mitchell which is about eight hours west of Brisbane, but that was about the extent of what I'd known. After that exercise I rang mum and said I want to find out more about where you grew up.

"I got my grandfather, four uncles and about a dozen cousins and we spent a weekend out there meeting the elders. It was the missing piece of the puzzle in my life.

"Without that weekend, I don't think I'd be where I am today because it certainly paved the way for what I -wanted to do later in life." Bounce Back is a podcast series helping people facing adversity during the COVID-19 pandemic.
---
DATABASE COVER-UP RECORDS CENSORED AS NEWS BROKE

DAYS before the Wuhan wet market was bleached, whistleblowers punished and virus samples destroyed, someone at the high-security Wuhan Institute of Virology (WIV) censored its virus database.

Revealed by open source intelligence uncovered in the UK, it was an apparent attempt to dissociate the laboratory from a novel coronavirus outbreak that would become a global pandemic.

Substantial alterations to the WIV database on the evening of December 30, the day before the World Health Organisation was alerted to the outbreak of a cluster of pneumonia cases in Wuhan, are just another indication that the Chinese Communist Party is hiding something when it comes to the origins of COVID-19.

The question of whether the virus came from the Wuhan wet market, as China insists, or inadvertently leaked from the nearby WIV laboratory, where high-risk research into animal-to-human transmission of bat coronaviruses was being conducted, is at the centre of cover-up allegations and a worldwide clamour for an independent investigation into source of the disease.

Shi Zhengli, the virologist known as China's "Bat Woman" for her work with bat coronaviruses, directs the WIV's Center for Emerging Infectious Diseases and is listed as the primary database contact.

On December 30, she was in Shanghai for a conference when she was summoned back to Wuhan with the news that a novel coronavirus had been detected in two pneumonia patients.

On the overnight train from Shanghai, according to a March article in Scientific American, she was stricken with worry about the coronaviruses.

"Could they have come from our lab?" she wondered.

After all, the closest known relative of this new coronavirus, a bat virus named RaTG13, was in her lab.

Weeks later, she would post a message on WeChat saying, "I swear with my life, [the virus] has nothing to do with the lab." But, at some point that night, while she was on the train to Wuhan, alterations were made to her database, which contained records of bat viruses transmitted to other wild animals.

Most of the changes were to delete the keywords "wildlife" or "wild animals". This is significant because global health researchers say the virus jumped from bats to humans via another wild animal - the crucial "missing link in the COVID-19 transmission chain.

Dr Shi used to boast her bat virus database was unique because it included data on virus variants in other wild animals.

Analysts have questioned if her database was censored to keep prying eyes away from references to cross-species transmission of viruses in wild animals.

For instance, the title of the database was changed that night from "Wildlife-borne Viral Pathogen Database" to "Bat and rodent-borne viral pathogen database". "Wild animal" was replaced with "bat and rodent" or "bat and rat" at least 10 times in the database. A reference to "arthropod vectors" also was removed.

Key words which might facilitate searches potentially connecting the database with the outbreak also were deleted. "Wild animal samples", "viral pathogen data", "emerging infectious diseases" and "cross-species infection" were keywords associated with the original version.

On December 30 they were replaced with "bat", "rodent" and "virus". "It looks like a rushed, inconsistent effort to disassociate the project from the outbreak by rebranding it," says the British open source intelligence analyst who found the alterations.

"It's a strange thing to do within hours of being informed of a novel coronavirus outbreak".

He surmises that: "If the WIV had found the missing link between bat virus RaTG13 and SARS-CoV-2 [the virus that causes COVID-19] from an animal vector, it would have been in Shi's database".

While there's no conclusive evidence that the changes were made for sinister reasons, they add weight to claims of a Chinese cover-up.

"This is an enormous crisis created by the fact that the Chinese Communist Party reverted to form, reverted to the kinds of disinformation, the kinds of concealment, that authoritarian regimes do," US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo said on Sunday.

"There is enormous evidence that [the Wuhan lab] is where this began … These are not the first times that we've had a world exposed to viruses as a result of failures in a Chinese lab." Yesterday Pompeo walked back his comments slightly. "We don't have certainty," he said. "We're all trying to get to clarity." China's refusal to allow an investigation of the origins of the Wuhan virus, or even to share original virus samples, has impeded the search for treatments and a vaccine."The CCP organisational and governmental culture is to cover up and ruthlessly control," says a retired senior Australian intelligence officer who served in China. "The arrest of frontline health professionals in January was standard practice." Early in the outbreak authorities arrested a group of medical professionals for "spreading rumours".
---
OLD grumpy bum, Wayne Bennett, might not be as grumpy as he seems. Bennett has been portrayed as the ogre that brought down a possible State of Origin -documentary that could have gone around the world.

Bennett's refusal drew considerable criticism - which went off everywhere, including here - but that might have been an over-reaction.

The Queensland and NSW rugby leagues were concerned at the lack of information and that, with few details agreed upon, it could get chaotic once inside camp.

"Frightening," said a director.

So concerning was the lack of detail in the proposal, the leagues were still unaware of the commercial agreement between the NRL, the production company and themselves even at this late stage.

The production company also wanted to send eight staff into camp, were told they could have two, and then planned for four as late as last week, when they were still advertising for employees willing to go into the bubble for four weeks.

While Bennett was not a fan, he understood the value a well-made documentary could provide the game as the code slowly understands more and more how vital the media is to its financial survival.

For all the talk of conquering China during the Super League war and the continual ridiculing of rugby league's World Cup as a genuine world competition, Origin is the one football contest here that could appeal around the world.

With the right storytelling, Origin's unique format could sell like other documentaries on Netflix, or the ESPN 30 For 30 series, despite their unfamiliar subject.

Unfortunately it appears the NRL has a problem with its storytelling, led by the amateurish Channel 9 coverage.

Then it doubled down.

If there was a perfect storm over the weekend it came not just in the first 40 minutes of the NRL grand final but, like a foul wind, on Saturday night in the AFL.

Record ratings were the backstory to the AFL's weekend triumph. With record speed the AFL pumped out the crowd had a 3.81 million national average, up 31 per cent on last year.

It was the AFL's biggest average since the Western Bulldogs beat the Swans in 2016, which drew 4.1 million.

The AFL failed to disclose its hidden advantages.

The grand final was the first to be televised at night, in prime time. It also featured two big Victorian clubs and was played out of Melbourne for the first time, which is currently in lockdown.

It meant there was little else for Victorians to do on Saturday. Against this, though, the NRL was positively anaemic.

Nine yesterday released its grand final viewership was up 13 per cent on last year, a fact eagerly tweeted by some of its disciples - only problem was, last year's grand final was the lowest rating NRL grand final ever (2.7 million nationally).

Sunday's 3.086 million national average was the fourth- lowest ever, with three of the four worst-watched deciders coming in the past four years.

Worse, for all the Storm's boasts about being well liked, and that the dislike was simply a "Sydney media agenda", it does not translate to the -medium that matters most.

Three of the television's four worst-rated grand finals involved the Storm. On Sunday afternoon NRL chief executive Andrew Abdo sat in the grandstand, waiting to do a radio interview and acknowledged the AFL's performance the night before.

Abdo conceded the future of the game was emotional storytelling. Finding the story and telling it right.

With COVID-19 finally revealing that broadcast fees are well above what broadcasters make in return, signalling a reduction in future negotiations, Abdo conceded the game has to be smarter about the way it packages and sells itself. It was a lesson learned too late when Sunday's ratings landed The NRL did a poor job of selling its grand final. Assistant coaches being trotted out two days before the biggest game of the year is an embarrassment.

The first State of Origin game will be played in eight days. It will be the first time the series is played after the NRL season. How fans will react is the question nobody at the NRL can answer. A documentary is a terrific idea, but you have to get the bread-and-butter stuff right or it is pointless.
---
TWO moments of brilliance in the final five minutes from Titans skipper Jamal Fogarty has propelled the Titans to a 14-10 win over St George Illawarra and all but ended the Dragons hopes of a miracle finals berth.

The Dragons enjoyed a mountain of possession all night. They were tackled inside the Titans 20-metre line a whopping 44 times, but all they had to show for it was a 10-4 lead heading into the dying stages of the match.

For a moment, it appeared as though that would be enough to keep the Red V in the finals race for at least one more week. But Fogarty helped create a try to Tyrone Peachey via a grubber in the 75th minute to level the scores before he loomed in supported of an AJ Brimson break in the very next set. With no Josh Papalii in sight to run him down, he scored next to the posts in the shadows of fulltime.

It was a stirring victory from the Titans and puts the final nail in the Dragons finals chances. If Cronulla beats North Queensland on Saturday, Dean Young's men will be three wins out of the eight with four games to play.

GOODNIGHT SAINTS The Dragons may be a mathematical chance to make the finals, but they need to move mountains to get into the eight from here.

The Red V have nobody but themselves to blame given the amount of possession they enjoyed, with halves Adam Clune and Corey Norman struggling to create any meaningful attack or build pressure through their kicking games.

It's been a valiant effort from the Dragons to rebound after their horror start to the year, and making the semi-finals would have relied on -several results going their way.

"It pisses me off, to be honest, because I know they're trying but you don't get two points for trying in this game," Young said. "You have to get the job done and they're all capable of doing their job and in the end we didn't get our jobs done. That's why we're sitting here pretty shattered and that's why the Titans are over there singing the team song. The Red V deserves everything, so I'm going to pick a side that'll go out and win each week."

TITANIC EFFORT The Dragons led 2-0 at the break after a tight first-half, with a Zac Lomax penalty all that separated the two teams.

But Saints had more than enough field position to put some points on the board - the Titans showed commendable spirit in defence, digging in on their own line and turning the Dragons away time and again.

A last-ditch tackle from Keegan Hipgrave on Clune after the halfback danced through off a scrum and seemed certain to score was a particular highlight.

In the end, the pressure had to tell. Jacob Host finally crossed in the 47th minute from a Ben Hunt short ball after the Dragons had four consecutive sets on the Titans line but they fought back well and scored themselves through Phillip Sami moments later.

Such effort has become more common under coach Justin Holbrook, who was handed a three-year contract extension during the week.

"The whole game was my highlight. We had six key guys missing tonight, and everyone we put out there was desperate to play," Holbrook said. "I loved every minute of it. We kept chipping away at them, and we couldn't get anything to go our way, we didn't let it distract us and we just kept coming."

FRIZZ STANDS TALL A Test and Origin regular, and one of the Dragons biggest names, Tyson Frizell signed with Newcastle for 2021 during the COVID-19 layoff and has not always been able to find his best form since.

But as the hard-nosed backrower's career with the Dragons begins to wind down he's been improving by the week, and he put in a powerful display, churning through 133 metres from 16 carries.

TITANS 14 DRAGONS 10 TITANS Tries: P Sami 50', T Peachey 75', J Fogarty 77' Goals: J Fogarty DRAGONS Tries: J Host Goals: Z Lomax 3
---
THE NRL will be forced to wait up to three weeks before being able to finalise four of the biggest decisions confronting 2020.

Despite entering Round 13 in the first week of August, the NRL and ARL Commission boss Peter V'landys remain powerless to reach any major decision on State of Origin and the grand final due to Melbourne's COVID-19 outbreak.

The final decisions may not be reached until early September. The ARL Commission is still unable to determine: ^ Whether this year grand final will be played in Sydney?

^ What venue the grand final will be contested?

^ Whether State of Origin I will still be played in Adelaide? ^ What alternate venue would be chosen if Adelaide was to be cancelled. The NRL will wait another two to three weeks to determine the full impact Victoria's coronavirus breakout may have had in NSW.

COVID infections data this month will show the NRL, whether NSW faces renewed sanctions. Until then, the NRL cannot push ahead with key decisions for later this season.

Just three weeks ago, the NRL had planned for full crowds returning to the grounds on August 1.

One well-placed source said: "The NRL can't make any decision with any certainty for two to three weeks until the virus is contained or eradicated. Things are changing so quickly." Provided NSW infection rates remain low, the grand final will be played in Sydney. Should those levels increase significantly, there is a chance the decider could be moved to Brisbane, Perth or even New Zealand.
---
IS China changing its tune?

Where once Beijing belted out the punchy 1980s dance hit "When Two Tribes Go to War", now it is cooing the 1970s pop-funk anthem, "Why Can't We Be Friends".

In an extraordinary address to the National Press Club on Wednesday, China's deputy head of mission at their -embassy in Canberra, Wang Xining, made a number of bold claims that seemed to seek to recast relations.

Among them: That Beijing "respects Australia's sovereignty", that the Chinese were personally hurt by Australia's push for investigation into the origins of COVID-19, and that "cold hearts and dark minds" should not cast a "shadow" over our relationship.

He even compared the relationship to a marriage, saying: "While a rift between husband and wife hurts one family, a rift between two countries hurts millions." It's all quite something to hear from a senior Chinese diplomat, given that the official Beijing line, as amplified by state media, until recently was that Australia was nothing more than "chewing gum stuck on the sole of our shoes".

If this is a marriage, it's not a healthy one. No partnership where one side alternates -unpredictably between acting the bully and wanting to kiss and make up can be.

And in considering China's bluster, it is also worth considering the bluff. Beijing likes to act as though it holds all the cards and that its rise is inevitable - so we'd better get on board or get steamrolled.

But historic flooding in China and worries about the Three Gorges Dam have highlighted the country's infrastructure and food security issues.

And revelations about their infiltration of Australian universities suggests that the communist state knows that it cannot innovate, and therefore must steal, new technologies. Those hoping that this might be a reset, and that China may be seeking to tone things down, should watch for actions - and not just words.
---
Elevation should be on merit THE Prime Minister's panic reshuffle is an over-reaction to a perceived problem regarding women in Parliament (Fair go for fairer sex as PM shuffles deck, 30/3).

I am not concerned how many women are ministers in his Government. What I want is the most competent ministry, irrespective of gender, that can take our country forward.

I don't think we have that in this reshuffle and we will suffer for it. Our Prime Minister seems to have lost his way recently and we may suffer for decisions made in haste to satisfy the minority leftist activists who are hellbent on ruining our great country.

The 'silent majority' need to speak up before it's too late. G. Hutton, Saratoga

HOW demeaning it would be if I were to be promoted simply on the basis of gender (Fair go for fairer sex as PM shuffles deck, 30/3).

I want a promotion on the basis of merit; that is qualifications, experience and achievements.

Introducing quotas is discriminatory towards males.

Rita Zammit, Concord

Base load power still the mainstay A VERY interesting article penned by our Opposition leader, Anthony Albanese (A plan to grow jobs and secure Australia's future, 30/3). He stated that Australia could lead the world by exporting lithium batteries to other nations of the world. The problem there is most countries are manufacturing goods by using base load power, such as coal, gas and nuclear. So why would they want our batteries?

Perhaps Mr Albanese can tell us what year or century batteries will be able to store the energy required to produce Australians steel, aluminium and the 1001 other products needed to make manufacturing in Australia more viable. It would be marvellous to build products such as trains in this country but you would need cheap, 24/7 reliable energy, which renewable energy cannot supply.  Then, of course, you have our unions, which would price Australia out of the market to supply such a product. Look what happened to the car industry.

Nice try Albo, but you need to go back to the drawing board. Bruce Rollo, Wollongbar

Where are the markets?

When Labor's Anthony Albanese can define the areas where Australian products have, at least, competitive equality, his latest pipe dream is just that.

Australia suffers from it's lack of volume markets, high wage structure combined with the cost of our tyranny of distance in distribution. I'm sure our manufacturers will be interested in the results of Labor's findings.

John Grundy, Online

What's the catch?

Labor leader Anthony Albanese promises to give manufacturing a good kick along with his proposed National Reconstruction Fund to be worth $15 billion. This should be the long awaited music to our ears. Why hasn't the Government done this already, it doesn't need a Rhodes Scholar to identify the need for such an initiative.

But I have two concerns here: first, how genuine Labor is with this commitment; and second, what will be the union involvement?

Will this be another 'superannuation fund' arrangement where unions dominate the proposed 'independent board'? There has to be a catch somewhere.

John George, Terrigal

Green with energy Congratulations to the NSW Government on their appointment of former PM Malcolm Turnbull to a climate advisory board.

Can anyone think of a better way for Mr Turnbull to signal his environmental credentials and commitment to the cause than by building a row of wind turbine generators on South Head? How many of the woke folk of the eastern suburbs would get that warm and fuzzy feeling with a permanent visual reminder of the death of the evil coal? Or he could festoon Red Hill, just behind Parliament House in Canberra, with wind towers.  Imagine the virtue signal to the rest of the world with our parliament overlooked by a green energy source.

Bruce Collison, Banks, ACT

SES to the rescue Congratulations to former prime minister Tony Abbott for digging in and helping out cleaning up the devastation left by the recent flooding (Tony lends a hand in flood clean-up, 30/3).

It's a shame there aren't a few more ex pollies like you out there lending a hand.

Brian Dorsett. Gorokan

Setting an example Isn't it wonderful to see a former prime minister out in our trouble spots doing what he can for the good of the community. An unheralded Tony Abbott leads some others for dead in the fair dinkum stakes. This community spirited man is what Australia's about, he's what Australia stands for. Past and present politicians should consider taking a leaf out of Tony's book.

Peter Cattlin, Freshwater

Quotas not the way Louise Roberts (Merit must come first, 30/3) is right. The push for more female representation and talk of quotas in Parliament will only lead to token appointments and potentially do more harm than good.

Yes, there should be more women in Parliament. Not just for the sake of diversity but because, shock horror, competence isn't just a bastion of the male genome.

But a bid to get more women elected to Parliament amid a furore over sexual assault and harassment does nothing to eradicate systemic failures and the appalling behaviours of the few bad apples, many of whom being unelected staffers. I think gender-based quotas places constraints and undermines the benefits of bringing a more diverse representation of people including not only gender, but race, age, experience and other.

Dr Jack Dikian, Mosman

Wuhan virus, in a name I'm confused? We were told by the PC brigade that we must not call the Wuhan, Chinese virus by its place of origin but must use the generic term COVID-19. If we did call it the Wuhan virus or Chinese virus we'd be racist.

But it's now OK to label the same virus in all its mutating forms by the place where it mutated and the new strain identified. So we have the UK/British/English strain (the Chinese Communist Party loves calling it that), the South African strain and what's being called "the most dangerous, most lethal strain"... the Brazilian variant.

Why the change in naming policy and who decides what's now OK? I haven't heard complaints from the UK, South African or Brazilian governments.

They accept the truth, the reality of the disease's origins, so why not China, the place that gave the world this insidious disease?

Paul Maher, Canberra

Briefly ...

We learn today that former PM Malcolm Turnbull has been appointed by NSW Cabinet to chair a new climate policy board. How would he get such a gig given his legacy of submarines that will never be built and the albatross that is Snowy 2.0? I'm hoping this is an April Fool's Day joke mistakenly released a few days early.

Rob Jones, Panania

* * * Well Louise Roberts knows what she is talking about (Merit must come first, 30/3). If a woman is up to the job give her a go at it but don't just put them in there to make the numbers look equal. That's what the Labor Party has been pushing for years and if the government pushes that way they could miss out on some very smart men who have run large organisations that can help the country forge ahead. Smart people run governments, not numbers in equality.

Michael, Lithgow

* * * It's probably a good time to remind the Parramatta sport scientist that Scott Morrison has a lot more fans than the Eels will ever have, and that sport and politics should always be separate (PM cops an eely stare, 29/3).

Jack Jackson, Burleigh Heads

HAVE YOUR SAYMAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
JOSH Aloiai will bring his boots or his lawnmower when the Wests Tigers play Manly as part of a bumper Anzac Day round seven clash.

The Tigers and Manly grudge match will join the annual games between St George Illawarra and the Roosters and Melbourne playing the Warriors on April 25 - which falls on a Sunday next year.

While it is likely Aloiai will be lining up for the Sea Eagles in that match, his future still remains uncertain ahead of his planned return to Tigers training on Monday.

The Tigers have ramped up negotiations with Broncos forward Joe Ofahengaue in recent days which would free Aloiai to join Manly -immediately.

The first half of next season is dominated by grudge matches and players seeking retribution against their former clubs. Payne Haas and new Titans recruit Tino Fa'asuamaleaui won't have to wait long to renew their rivalry in what is a now highly anticipated local derby between Brisbane and the Gold Coast on the Gold Coast in round two. David Fifita will play against the Broncos for the first time.

A week later, the Roosters and South Sydney will showdown in round three after again dominating headlines in the off-season regarding the tug of war for the long-term signature of youngster Joseph Suaalii.

Tyson Frizell will get an early chance to impress against former club St George Illawarra in round four when the Knights host the Dragons.

The Warriors have been slated to host games in Auckland despite the ongoing uncertainty regarding COVID-19. One of their first home games will be up against Addin Founa-Blake's former club Manly in round five. The clubs clash again just four weeks later.

ARL chairman Peter V'landys said he expected the Warriors to be able to travel freely between Australia and New Zealand for matches.

"We're very confident that the international borders will be open by that stage," V'landays said.

"We all know a vaccine is -imminent - at least we hope it is. "Every decision we've taken at the NRL, we have done on the scientific data and the expert advice from the best biosecurity expert in -Australia, who is very balanced.

"He tells us that he believes we will be playing our games in New Zealand in the first round. If it doesn't happen we have contingencies in place for all scenarios." Brothers Blayke and Jayden Brailey could finally get a chance to play against each other in round six when the Knights host Cronulla.

One of the game's emerging rivalries Canterbury and Penrith will play in round 12. The Bulldogs have already pinched coach Trent Barrett, prop Jack Hetherington and rising half Matt Burton from the Panthers.

Barrett will also coach against former club Manly in rounds 16 and 24. St George Illawarra recruit Jack Bird faces his former club the -Broncos in round 13.

While most of the high profile showdowns happen in the early part of the season, Kyle Flanagan will have to wait until round 17 when his Bulldogs play the Roosters. New Dragons coach Anthony Griffin won't coach against his former club Penrith until round 22.

The draw will be announced today.

2021 GRUDGE MATCHES ■ Round two: Brisbane v Gold Coast The fuse has already been lit for this local derby after Payne Haas and new Titans recruit Tino Fa'asuamaleaui traded fists in Origin II. The Titans have also signed former Bronco David Fifita on one of the richest contracts in the game.

■ Round three: South Sydney v Sydney Roosters Bitter rivals who do not need any extra motivation to incite their fans. This offseason again put the two teams against each other for the long-term signature of youngster Joseph Suaalii. There is a suggestion Suaalii could be cleared to play before his 18th birthday in a potential showdown against South Sydney.

■ Round three: Penrith v Melbourne The Panthers get to host the grand final rematch. While there is no way of avenging their premiership loss, they can show there is no lingering mental torment by beating the Storm.

■ Round four: Newcastle v Dragons Tyson Frizell won't have to wait long to play his former club. And he gets to do so in front of his new home fans. Frizell was one of the highest-profile defections.

■ Rounds five and round nine: Manly v Warriors Manly will have to try to stop Addin Fonua-Blake twice in five weeks. Fonua-Blake wanted out of the Sea Eagles and quickly found a home at the Warriors.

■ Round six: South Sydney v Wests Tigers Can the Tigers do what South Sydney couldn't and ensure James Roberts stays on track? By round six we should know if the Tigers' gamble is paying off or not.

■ Round seven: Wests Tigers v Manly It could be BYO paintbrushes depending on what plays out for Josh Aloiai. It is unclear which team he will turn out for this week but there is little loved lost between the two clubs.

■ Round 12: Penrith v Canterbury First Canterbury pinched Trent Barrett. Then it was Jack Hetherington and now it is Matt Burton. And you get the sense the Bulldogs aren't done with rampaging through Penrith's stocks.

■ Round 13: Dragons v Broncos Jack Bird had an unhappy stint at Brisbane, where he struggled with injuries. He gets the chance at his junior club to show if he is back to his best. ■ Round 17: Canterbury v Roosters Kyle Flanagan was made the scapegoat at the Roosters. He has quickly been embraced by the Bulldogs faithful. He has to wait a while to show the Roosters what they are missing out on.
---
THE World Health Organisation conceded its handling of the COVID-19 pandemic must be reviewed, as it continued to defend the way China managed the virus yesterday.

The regional director of the World Health Organisation (WHO) in the Pacific Dr Takeshi Kasai (pictured) told a public briefing its expert committee had initially been divided on whether to declare the disease outbreak a public health emergency.

However, he said the organisation had been in constant contact with China after it revealed it had an outbreak of a cluster of pneumonia cases of unknown cause.

"We as organisations, we try our best to, as quickly as possible and then as transparently as possible to respond to these diseases but we have to review later and we need to be evaluated later," he said.

He defended China's transparency in sharing the make-up of the virus with WHO. The concession came as Prime Minister Scott Morrison has backed an independent international inquiry into the origins of coronavirus while claiming it would not be a criticism of China.

"It's not pursued as an issue of criticism, it's pursued as an issue of importance for public health," he said.

The WHO has come in for major criticism for being too slow to act and US President Donald Trump has withdrawn funding from the body claiming it was too China-centric.

The president has called for an investigation into whether the virus escaped from a laboratory in Wuhan.China has been criticised for initially suppressing information on the virus spread.
---
THE World Health Organisation has called on wealthy countries to stop acting like desperate shoppers in the toilet paper aisle and buying up all the available doses of COVID-19 vaccine.

The pandemic is picking up speed, with 14 per cent more cases reported globally per day this week compared to the previous week.

As a result, much of the world has been racing to grab vaccines. The European Union has announced a deal for another 300m jabs from Pfizer/BioNTech, doubling its supply of the drug.

But there might be some doses going spare in France, which is now paying the price for not clamping down on its powerful anti-vax movement.

A poll at the end of 2020 found only 40 per cent of French people planned to get inoculated.

Even in the face of rising case numbers, a new poll on Friday showed that figure was still an appallingly low 56 per cent.

Britain, meanwhile, approved its third vaccine on Friday from US firm Moderna and is rushing to vaccinate as many as possible.

It reported a record death toll of 1325 on Friday, while London Mayor Sadiq Khan declared the capital was "at crisis point" and about to run out of hospital beds.

The news came as WHO called on rich countries to let poorer countries have some vaccines.

WHO's Covax program head Bruce Aylward said: "Fifty per cent of the high-income countries in the world are vaccinating today. Zero per cent of the low-income countries are vaccinating. That is not equitable." But there was also scandal for WHO, which is already struggling to get permission from China to let a team inside to investigate the origins of COVID-19.

Francesco Zambon, a WHO co-ordinator based in Venice, said his 102-page report into Italy's failures to contain the virus was withdrawn to avoid embarrassing Ranieri Guerra, a senior WHO official who was previously a key player in Italy's pandemic planning.

Mr Guerra, now a WHO assistant director-general, denies any wrongdoing. In positive news, fears have been rising over the new British and South African mutations of the virus but BioNTech has announced its vaccine is effective against these strains.

However, that is scant comfort for those infected in Iran.

Iran's supreme leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei banned the import of US and British-produced vaccines, saying they were "completely untrustworthy".

He tweeted: "It's not unlikely they would want to contaminate other nations". Iran has reported more than 1.2m cases. China, the source of the virus, has now sealed off two cities and imposed travel restrictions on 18m after uncovering 127 cases. And Sweden, which controversially avoided lockdowns, has passed a law giving the government stronger new powers to impose restrictions.
---
SAINT

After four months in the spinal unit at his Wakefield Hospital, Mose Masoe has returned home to his partner and children in the north of England. Before leaving, he bought and handed out small gifts to each and every one on the medical staff who have assisted him in recovery.

SINNER The NRL's hopelessly inadequate penalties handed down to the players who breached COVID-19 protocols and put the season resumption and hundreds of jobs at risk. This is a first-round failure for acting chief executive Andrew Abdo, who should, at the very least, have overruled the Integrity Unit and banned players for a month.

SHOOSH Which old rugby league legend is threatening to withdraw from The Daily Telegraph NRL tipping competition if winners from the first two rounds are scrapped? He tipped eight from eight, his first-ever clean sweep, in round two.

SHOOSH II We're hearing NRL referees will be on the same deal as the players when they return to work, with 80 per cent pay cuts. The refs resume part-time training tomorrow.

SHOOSH III No worries for one Victorian sports star who has found a way around the state's golf ban by buying a $10,000 simulator for his lounge room.

SHOOSH IV To coincide with State of Origin in November, there's talk of Tonga, New Zealand and England playing a Tri-series of Test matches. It is hoped venues will be open to the public by then in New Zealand and Australia.

SPOTTED A PACER named Buzz Rothfield, a two-year-old bay colt sired by a nag called Sportswriter, having a trial at Albion Park in Brisbane on Friday. Buzz will be trained and driven by the highly regarded Tayla Gillespie. We'll let you know when he's ready to race.

SPOTTED II THE great Gus Gould getting a haircut and visiting a Post Office in the Shire on Tuesday.

SPOTTED IV Brett Kimmorley - still looking fit enough to play - pounding the footpaths around Caringbah and Miranda.

SPOTTED VMy north-of-the-border colleague Peter Badel filing an exclusive from Ward 7E of the Wesley Hospital in Brisbane on Tuesday. "Bomber" had surgery for a stomach hernia but it couldn't stop him reaching for the laptop he brought along just in case a big NRL story broke.
---
DESPITE the long shadow COVID-19 cast this year, not everything in 2020 was doom and gloom. In fact there have been many significant medical advances, good news stories and miraculous rescues which offered welcome patches of light amid a dark pandemic.

In July, the quick-thinking actions of three police officers at Casula made all the difference to two toddler cousins found unconscious in a backyard pool. Members of the Al-Achrafe family desperately tried to revive little Destiny and Osman, both aged two, but the children weren't breathing and there was no pulse.

But police officers, Sergeant Mick McClafferty, Senior Constable Peter Heginbotham and Senior Constable Victor Suarez, arrived in time and began performing CPR and kept the pair alive until the paramedics came and took them to hospital. Even then, the tots had to be put in a coma and it took a week until they received the all-clear.

In June, Australians rejoiced when missing autistic teen William Callaghan, 14, was found safe and well after three days in freezing temperatures in Victorian bush known as Mount Disappointment - later to be dubbed Mount Miracle.

Another child lucky to be alive is three-year-old Ayda Gezgin, found in the wreckage of her apartment 90 hours after an earthquake struck Turkey. And another three-year-old, Elif Perincek, was also miraculously rescued after three days.

While 2020 has been a horrific year for shark attacks - the eight deaths to date are the most in nearly a century - some have been lucky to escape with their lives. In early Dec-ember, surfer Dion Lynch was bitten by a great white in South Australia and had to swim back to shore despite "catastrophic" lacerations to his back and walk another 300m to get help. "The stars aligned for this gentleman," paramedic Michael Rushby said.

In September came news of a breakthrough for arthritis treatment - an antioxidant plant extract from the bark of the French maritime pine tree. According to research published in the Journal of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, the over-the counter medicine Arborvitae decreased pain scores by 66 per cent and increased walking distance without pain for 50 per cent of those involved in a trial. King of country rock Jade Hurley said the breakthrough drug saved his life.

And researchers at James Cook University made a- -breakthrough which could lead to an early diagnostic test for Alzheimer's, with the same techniques used to study the -origins of the moon.

They used mass spectrometry, normally used to analyse meteorites and lunar rocks, to compare brains of those with the disease and healthy brains. .

Another positive story to come out of 2020 was the -release of Australian academic Kylie Moore-Gilbert from an Iranian jail after being locked up for two years.

And just days before Christmas came the "Christmas Miracle" wombat - found alive in its dead mother's pouch. The wombat, Holly, now lives at the Australian Reptile Park after being rescued when the mother was killed by a car.

The miracle kids Lifesaving CPR Destiny Shrief with Senior Constable Peter Heginbotham, who gave her CPR after she was pulled from a pool.

Izmir quake survivor Elif Perincek after being pulled from the rubble in the quake in Turkey and (right) in hospital.

Teen found Missing teenager William Callaghan was found alive in rugged Victorian bushland.

Shark survivor Dion Lynch was bitten off Kangaroo Island.

Jade's jiving Arthritis treatment has helped Jade Hurley.

Wombat saved Holly was saved from her dead mum's pouch.

Aussie freed in Iran Kylie Moore-Gilbert as a free woman.
---
Dangers of California dreamin' Tim Blair speaks only the truth about the energy fiasco in California caused by the fact-free, ideologically driven, cult- like beliefs being pushed here by wealthy devotees of the Church of Climatology like Zali Steggall (Zali's doomed dream - Opinion, 27/12).

This prompts the question: will the new year bring some sanity to the climate and energy situation in Australia, or will we continue to be influenced by the noisy minority with no understanding of the physics, engineering and economics behind provision of affordable power?

Or will our politicians stay deaf to reality yet again and turn us into another California.?

Doug Hurst, Chapman, ACT "" " Tim Blair is an entertaining writer but he is wrong about nuclear power for Australia (Zali's doomed dream - Opinion, 28/12). Rather, Australia is one of the best places in the world for solar energy.

Geoscience Australia estimates that the solar radiation received annually contains 10,000 times more energy than what the country uses. Yet surprisingly we still generate fewer MWh per annum from solar than even the UK or Italy, so there is plenty of room for growth.

Perhaps Zali could take Tim for a spin when she buys her EV. Maybe like a car-mad friend of mine, he will become a convert.

Ray Peck, Hawthorn, Victoria

No point whining, when danger is heartbeat away Whingers complaining about the cancellation of events during this pandemic should grow up.

Anyone who has been keeping up with coronavirus events overseas, particularly the new mutated strain of the virus, will understand how we are still not out of the woods.

Closer to home Victoria was locked down due to it getting out of control. The northern beaches cluster is still causing concern as they have been unable to trace the source of the infection. NSW health has so far been able to catch other outbreaks across Sydney (Baffling puzzle of cluster's origins, 28/12).

Congratulations to the large numbers who have been tested. Unfortunately we have the young, silly and others that think it's OK to still have house and beach parties (Dreadful hangover of illegal parties, 28/12).

Cancelling the Sydney Hobart race was being proactive. Imagine if participants became sick or Tasmania closed access just in case and told the yachties to go back to where they came from.

Even New Year's Eve will be different this year to keep everyone safe (NYE restrictions announced by Gladys Berejiklian - Online, 28/12).

It is better to err on the side of caution than to deal with the headache when something goes wrong.

Joe Kovac, Prestons

In awe of ingenuity The December 11 decision by the federal government and pharmaceutical company CSL to end trials by the University of Queensland of a promising COVID-19 vaccine was both disappointing and reassuring.

Disappointing because the vaccine showed considerable promise, but reassuring because it showed that the responsible entities had an appropriately low risk tolerance.

Now the disappointment can be replaced by hope and optimism, with the very welcome news that the vaccine developed by Oxford University and pharmaceutical company AstraZeneca will be manufactured in Australia by Australian-born pharmaceutical company CSL (Oz-made vaccine is a winner, 28/12).

There seems to be no end to human ingenuity, especially in an emergency. Douglas Mackenzie, Deakin, ACT

Judging the judges Judges having a lend of us is nothing new - it has ever been thus. The judiciary is accountable to no one except themselves and their exclusive "club" (Justice delayed as judges on leave; 28/12).

It's time federal and state parliaments reviewed the arrangements for the appointment of judges in the various courts to deliver greater transparency and accountability.

Given the number of legal professionals who sit in these places, however, the task will not be an easy one.

There is also likely to be a reluctance to tread upon such sacred turf. John George, Terrigal

Boldly researching ...

Next-generation research is set to take on a whole new meaning with a study dubbed GenV set to track up to 150,000 newborns from birth to old age, examining every aspect of their health and wellbeing (Oh baby! A study to last a lifetime, 28/12).

The bold undertaking is expected to put Australian medical research at the forefront for decades to come.

Australia it seems does not need a starship to boldly go where no one has gone before.

Peter Penglis, Kambah, ACT

Euthanasia plebiscite With a new poll showing more than 70 per cent of NSW voters support voluntary assisted dying laws, euthanasia should not be left to politicians (NSW ready for die laws 27/12).

Best to have a plebiscite with the next election for voters to decide whether to legalise voluntary euthanasia.

Any proposed euthanasia laws must have strict guidelines so they can provide the appropriate balance to ensure that terminal long-suffering patients are empowered with the humane option to avoid a senseless painful death, that also impacts negatively on loved ones and friends.

What is life when there is no quality of life at all?

As Stephen Hawking once asked: "We don't let animals suffer, so why humans?" Steve Ngeow, Chatswood

Stumped by logic Australia's bowling attack was acclaimed as "the best ever" after its demolition of the Indian batting line up in the first Test, after the batting line-up seemed out of sorts with replacements for injured players in the top order.

Move forward to the Boxing Day Test, same "best ever" bowlers in the Aussie team and same nervous replacements in Australia's batting top order trying to impress selectors and guess what? Australia wins the toss and decides to bat and not bowl first (Holiday hangover, 27/12).

Has the "bubble" exhausted the oxygen from our decision makers? Bill Donovan, Port Macquarie

Dire year's fine leadership So, only a few days left in this year - which has delivered nothing but disaster for most of it.

We have had bushfire, flood and this COVID virus ruin many people's lives. So many will need years to get back to a normal life.

Lucky we have a very good PM in Scott Morrison and a good premier in Gladys Berejiklian. They have guided us with the correct decisions.

Hopefully this new vaccine will work. Wishing everybody a very happy antiviral 2021.

George Orban, Breakfast Point

Briefly ...

So, flying foxes with lyssavirus have been responsible for three deaths in the last 24 years, prompting a warning from Queensland Health (Bat virus alarm, 28/12). Seems to be overkill, just like their border closures to greater Sydney and the Blue Mountains.

Alyn, Penrith "" " Why waste millions of dollars in fireworks on New Year's Eve when no one can watch them, when we can wait just another few months and have a real celebration when we are all vaccinated. Seems to me to be a better reason for a celebration.

Ed Ginns, Londonderry "" " The people of NSW are being treated like an unimportant minority voice on the issue of voluntary assisted dying despite more than 70 per cent favouring the ability to die with dignity (NSW ready for die laws, 27/12). When did the church become the majority?

Janet Edwards, Kingsford

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
THERE HASN'T BEEN A SPORTING YEAR LIKE IT. ANGUS MORRISON GETS OFF THE COUCH AND TRIES TO MAKE SENSE OF THE 12 MONTHS THAT HAVE PASSED HIM BY

JANUARY ■ New Year's Day and the first international sporting title of 2020 goes to Scotsman Peter Wright (he of the multi-coloured mohawk) at the PDC world darts championships in London. That is, if you think darts is a sport. Personally, I think if you can be obese and do it while drinking a pint, it's not a sport.

■ The first tennis grand slam gets under way in Melbourne, with defending champion Novak Djokovic and American Sofia Kenin taking the titles. Not much to cheer about for Aussie fans, but Dylan Alcott did win the wheelchair quad singles. At least the tennis gives everyone something to think about instead of those awful bushfires - good on Nick Kyrgios for leading the appeal for bushfire assistance. The year can only get better from here.

■ The Netball Nations Cup is played in England and won by New Zealand. Australia didn't take part, which suggests the name of the tournament needs a bit of work.

■ Super Rugby starts with the Brumbies edging the Reds 27-24 after being 10 behind at the break. Looking forward to this comp - it should be a beauty this year.

■ PANDEMIC UPDATE: Rumours of a dodgy-looking virus coming out of China. Probably just man-flu.

FEBRUARY ■ In the annual clash of helmets and shoulder pads, the Kansas City Chiefs win the Super Bowl with a 31-20 victory over the San Francisco 49ers in Miami. Chiefs quarterback Patrick Mahomes (below) is MVP. Ridiculously good, that bloke. It was the turn of Demi Lovato to murder the national anthem and J-Lo and Shakira provided the halftime entertainment that wasn't actually terrible.

■ Deontay Wilder and Tyson Fury go toe-to-toe again after that dodgy draw in their first fight. Wilder is a slight favourite but the Gypsy King is all over him, knocking him down twice before the American's corner throws in the towel in the seventh. Fury had earlier blamed a failed drug test on eating the meat of an uncastrated boar. What a load of balls.

■ The Six Nations kicks off in great style, with France beating England to wipe that smug grin off Eddie Jones's face.

■ In Super Rugby, the Tahs run in five tries to beat Johannesburg's Lions 29-17. I tell you, this is going to be a rugby season to remember.

■ PANDEMIC UPDATE: Definitely not visiting some place called Wuhan anytime soon. And if I do end up there, I'm not eating the bat soup. Rest of the world seems OK.

MARCH ■ The month when COVID-19 went from being a pain in the throat to a pain in the backside. Everything is being cancelled. Golf's Players Championship? Cancelled. The Australian Grand Prix? Cancelled. The world figure skating championships? Actually, that one was a good call.

■ The Brits are a bit slow on the uptake, though. Ban large gatherings, the scientists wailed. Yeah, all right, they said - but we've got just enough time to cram hundreds of thousands of punters into the four-day Cheltenham racing festival, and 54,000 into Anfield to watch Liverpool play Atletico Madrid in the Champions League. What's the worst that could happen, you ask? Now the country is plague central.

■ Verry Elleegant (above) wins the Tancred at Rosehill. Honestly, can't anyone spell these days?

■ The NRL season kicks off. The Warriors score zero points against the Knights. Could be a long season for the Kiwis. There's only time for two rounds. Bloody COVID.

■ The AFL season kicks off. For one weekend. And the Cats lose. Then it gets cancelled as well.

■ The Brumbies smash the Waratahs 47-14, and all the rugby gets cancelled. What's the point of life?

■ PANDEMIC UPDATE: Thanks for nothing, China. My hands are now consuming more alcohol than my mouth.

APRIL ■ Nothing of any note happens in the world of sport. The only international sport we can watch or bet on is Belarusian football because the country's president Alexander Lukashenko is a bona fide nut-job who thinks COVID can be cured by vodka. Turns out COVID is about the only thing that can't be cured by vodka. Everyone's favourite team Slutsk start the season well, but they were pretty quick to go down (behave).

■ PANDEMIC UPDATE: The neighbours seem to be building an extension purely out of toilet rolls.

MAY ■ Belarusian football is getting a bit boring. Luckily, the NRL starts up again. The Dragons are beaten 18-0 by the Warriors. Any team who can't score a point against the Kiwis should take up darts or some other non-sport. Synchronised swimming. The triple jump. Dressage. The Storm are beaten 22-6 by the Raiders. Looks like no title for the Victorians this year.

■ PANDEMIC UPDATE: The kids are being home-schooled. I've suspended both of them for squabbling. Amazon boss Jeff Bezos is now the richest man in the world and sent a personal letter of thanks to my wife.

JUNE ■ The first leg of American racing's Triple Crown, the Belmont Stakes, is won by Tiz The Law - the first New York-bred winner of the Belmont for 118 years. Which is also the single-most boring sporting statistic of 2020.

■ The Euros were supposed to start, but England will have to wait another year to not win a major football trophy.

■ At least the Premier League is back, with Liverpool simply having to turn up for the next six weeks to win the title. And there are no English football fans at the games. Bonus.

■ In the NRL, the Broncos are smashed 59-0 at Suncorp by the Roosters, who didn't even have James Tedesco in their line-up. Scary stuff from the Chooks. And the Storm lose 21-14 to Penrith. No chance for the title, those southern blokes.

■ The AFL starts up again, with a 36-36 draw between the Magpies and Richmond. Didn't they practise their kicking during the season break? Gary Ablett Sr could score 36 points by himself. In a quarter.

■ PANDEMIC UPDATE: I don't even know what month it is. Wish I had shares in Netflix and whoever makes Guinness.

JULY ■ Formula One is back! And Lewis Hamilton didn't win! The season opener in Austria goes to Valtteri Bottas, with Mercedes teammate Hamilton finishing fourth. Normal service soon resumes, with the Brit winning virtually everything for the rest of the season. He'll be knighted in January - it's a racing certainty.

■ Liverpool wins the Premier League title by a lot. Bournemouth, Watford and Norwich City are relegated, replaced by Leeds, West Brom and Fulham.

■ In the NRL, the Broncos are smashed 48-0 by Wests Tigers. I'm so old, I can remember when Brisbane could play footy. Lockyer, Langer, Lazarus, Thorn, Tallis … those blokes must be spinning.

■ The Olympics are starting in Tokyo! No, wait, they're not. They're off 'til next year. Or maybe the year after. Or maybe never, if we're all dead. And Wimbledon is off. No huge loss, that one. It's been rubbish since McEnroe retired.

■ PANDEMIC UPDATE: My teachers said I wouldn't amount to anything, but here I am, lying on the sofa, saving lives.

AUGUST ■ Lewis Hamilton wins the British Grand Prix. And the Spanish Grand Prix. And the Belgian Grand Prix. Just give him the bloody trophy.

■ Bayern Munich win the Champions League final against perennial chokers PSG, courtesy of a goal from former Paris player Kingsley Coman.

■ We even had a golfing major as the sporting world unsteadily got back on its feet, with Collin Morikawa, one year out of college, taking home the PGA Championship title. Not bad for a guy who can't even spell Colin.

■ Speaking of which, Verry Elleegant wins the Winx Stakes. That sure is some troubled spelling.

■ In the NRL, the Eels (left) beat the Storm 14-0. The Melbourne team must be 100/1 to take the title.

■ PANDEMIC UPDATE: Oh, thank god. They're starting to play some proper sports around the world. And American football.

SEPTEMBER ■ Frenchman Pierre Gasly wins the Italian Grand Prix from 10th on the grid to have one Finnish punter dancing in his lounge. The unnamed gambler put 24 cents (no Kerry Packer, this bloke) on a podium finish comprising Gasly first, Carlos Sainz second and Lance Stroll third. What, no Hamilton? No Bottas? No Verstappen? Are you mad? Apparently not, because that's how they crossed the line - at odds of 167,000/1.

It was the equivalent of predicting the next Rugby League World Cup will finish Lebanon 1, Portugal 2, Russia 3.

■ At somewhat shorter odds, Bryson DeChambeau - channelling his inner Thor - beat up the notoriously tough Winged Foot golf course in New York to win the US Open by six strokes. He was the only player to finish under par.

■ The Storm lose again - 30-22 to the Dragons - to surely end any hopes they have of winning the NRL title.

■ PANDEMIC UPDATE: Doctors are still telling us not to touch our faces, but that's virtually impossible if you have a can of beer in each hand.

OCTOBER ■ Richmond wins another AFL title with an 81-50 victory over Geelong in the grand final - at the Gabba of all places. And at night. The result probably shouldn't count for those two reasons. The Cats led by 22 points late in the second quarter, but could add only 15 points in the final two quarters as the Dustin Martin-inspired Tigers stormed to a third title in four seasons. Martin won the Norm Smith Medal in all three wins.

■ Speaking of handy players, LeBron James (right) leads the LA Lakers to the NBA title with a 4-2 finals win over the Miami Heat.

■ Revenge is sweet for Jose Mourinho as his new club, Spurs, spank the club who sacked him, Manchester United, 6-1. At Old Trafford. He was extremely humble afterwards, as we've come to expect.

■ If horses were played by Hollywood stars, Classique Legend would be George Clooney - the handsome grey devil. What a win in the The Everest at Randwick. And down south, Verry Elleegant wins the Turnbull Stakes. This horse is starting to p*** me off.

■ The Six Nations is finally completed and Eddie Jones is grinning smugly again. England wins the title, with the Irish players looking like they spent the off-season in the pub with free pies. Italy comes last. They've more wooden spoons than Jamie Oliver.

■ And the Melbourne Storm win the NRL Grand Final. Wait. What? ■ PANDEMIC UPDATE: For something made in China, this coronavirus sure is lasting a long time. Is it 2023 yet?

NOVEMBER ■ "Hey, Tiger! How on Earth did you shoot a 10 on a par-three?" "Because I missed the putt for a nine." For 15 minutes, Masters champion Tiger Woods played like the rest of us. In the final round at Augusta, he arrived at the par-three, 155-yard 12th hole in good shape - if a bit far back to trouble the leaders. His tee shot lands short of the green and spins back into Rae's Creek. Playing from the drop area, his third shot reaches the green but also spins back into the water. Think Kevin Costner in Tin Cup, but without Rene Russo to ogle.

Back at the drop area, he overcompensates and his fifth shot lands in the back bunker. From there, he chips across the green and back into the water. His balls spent more time in the water than David Hasselhoff's. Dustin Johnson wins the green jacket.

Aussie Cameron Smith is runner-up, becoming the first golfer in Masters history to shoot all four rounds in the 60s - 67, 68, 69, 69. I backed him at $90, but not each-way. There's a name for mugs like me. It's "mug".

■ The team tagged "the worst Queensland side in 40 years" upsets the highly rated Blues, winning the Origin series 2-1. Who else but Wayne Bennett to the rescue once more for the Maroons?

■ In cricket, the Mumbai Indians beat Delhi Capitals by five wickets in Dubai to win their fifth IPL title - as anyone with half a brain (rugby television match officials, for example) could have forecast at the start of the tournament when they saw Trent Boult and Jasprit Bumrah in the same bloody team.

■ Twilight Payment holds off the fast-finishing Tiger Moth to win the big one at Flemington. The horse I thought couldn't lose lost. And then got shot.

■ A week after the Wallabies were humiliated 43-5 by the All Blacks in Sydney, Dave Rennie's men (above) stun them 24-22 in Brisbane. New Zealand then get beaten by Argentina for the first time in, like, forever. Glorious stuff. This new coach of theirs, Ian Foster, should get a pay rise and a contract extension. He's bloody rubbish.

■ Lewis Hamilton (below) bags his seventh world Formula 1 title - equalling Michael Schumacher's record - with victory in the Turkish Grand Prix. A win in Bahrain - where Frenchman Romain Grosjean survived his car breaking into two pieces and exploding - means Hamilton won 11 of- the season's opening 15 races.

■ PANDEMIC UPDATE: Can't wait until my future grandchildren ask me what the pandemic of 2020 was like. "No idea, kids. I was drunk for most of it."

DECEMBER ■ The Premier League table is starting to take shape. Except it looks upside down. Spurs are top, West Ham fifth, and Southampton sixth. Pre-season favourites Manchester City are 11th, and Arsenal have slumped to 15th after their best (only good) player Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang started playing like his mum.

■ The Formula One drivers have finally found a way to beat Lewis Hamilton (below) - give him coronavirus.

Young Scottish driver George Russell was offered Hamilton's car for the Sakhir Grand Prix in Bahrain and it turned into a day he will never forget.

Russell smashed it in qualifying to start second on the grid, quickly took the lead in the race itself and look destined for a historic win. And then things went a bit pear-shaped.

While the cars were under a flag, Mercedes called Russell in to the pits for fresh tyres. Soon back on his way to a stunning victory, the call comes over the radio: "You have to come back in - we gave you the wrong tyres." Ouch.

A quick change and Russell emerges in fifth place, but the way he was driving, he could have easily passed four cars in 14 laps. Then he got a flat tyre. He finished ninth.

While all this was happening, Racing Point's Sergio Perez was winning his first F1 race in 190 attempts - no other winner in history has taken that many races to pop his cherry.

■ England beats the French reserves in injury time at Twickenham to win the inaugural Autumn Cup, proving once again that ugly rugby will more often than not beat attractive rugby.

■ The touring Indian cricket team - Kohli et al - is all out for 36 in their second innings in Adelaide in the first Test, handing Australia an eight-wicket win. You couldn't make this stuff up.

■ The IOC goes full woke and announces breakdancing will be a sport at the 2024 Paris Olympics. Which, in its own way, sums up 2020.

■ PANDEMIC UPDATE: If you read the rules a certain way, you're not allowed to have the holidays with the in-laws. That's my interpretation and I'm sticking with it.

MARCH NRL SEASON KICKS OFF OCTOBER RICHMOND WINS GRAND FINAL
---
EXCLUSIVE Aussie link to China military lab

CHINA'S People's Liberation Army has been involved in scientific research - co-funded by the Australian government - into the origins of the coronavirus.

In an explosive revelation, a study co-funded by the Australian Research Council and the Chinese government - and trumpeted by The University of Sydney as helping to unlock the genetic code of COVID-19 - relied on a laboratory in one of the institutes in the People's Liberation Army's Academy of Military Medical Sciences to conduct its "genetic sequencing" and "virus isolation".

The director of this microbiology institute, Professor Wu-Chan Cao, who is thanked in the paper's acknowledgments for his "substantial contribution", has the rank of colonel and is also a Wuhan Institute of Virology board member - the same facility at the centre of a global probe into whether the naturally-occurring coronavirus was accidentally released from its laboratory or came from a local wet market. The study is one of two scientific papers on the coronavirus undertaken by University of Sydney virologist and evolutionary biologist, Professor Edward Holmes.FULL REPORT PAGES 4-5
---
COWBOYS fullback Valentine Holmes used the NRL season suspension to fast-track his return to rugby league.

Holmes will be back in North Queensland's No. 1 jersey when the Cowboys reboot their 2020 campaign against the Gold Coast Titans in Townsville next Friday night.

The two-month COVID-19 shutdown was a speed bump for Holmes, who was only two games into his Cowboys career following a one-year sojourn in the NFL.

But the Queensland Origin flyer used the break to further hone his league skills after missing a year of footy while he tried to crack into the NFL with the New York Jets.

Holmes, 24, practised catching bombs by himself and did early morning fitness sessions in Townsville parks to ensure he was ready when the NRL season rebooted. He said: "I couldn't have anyone putting bombs up for me so I'd do it myself and chase them."
---
Beijing's gutter social media play is provocative - and it means to be. They want to use outrage over alleged war crimes to divide our politics and society against itself

Here's a little thought experiment for you: If Chinese special forces were accused of committing war crimes overseas, do you think Beijing would investigate the matter and then issue a very public and highly embarrassing report -revealing their misdeeds for all the world to see?

Of course not.

Indeed it's tempting, given the country's behaviour from Xinjiang to Hong Kong, to say they'd probably give the troops in question a medal.

Which makes yesterday's tweet heard 'round the world all the more galling. The idea that China - China! - of all nations would suddenly decide to come across as peacenik as a bearded old crusty selling Green Left Weekly is just too much to bear.

In Yiddish, the word is chutzpah - often jokingly described as what someone has who kills their parents, then throws themselves on the mercy of the court on account of being an -orphan.

And that's about the sum of it.

Because how else can you look at a nation whose totalitarian government maintains concentration camps, uses political prisoners for slave labour, and so much besides criticising Australia for bad behaviour?

Of course no nation is perfect, but the cognitive dissonance is almost too much to bear.

The tweet in question, sent by one of China's chief "wolf warrior" diplomats, was so over the top that it is almost sure to cause a miscalculation and an over-reaction.

Coming from the account of -Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian, it read, "shocked by murder of Afghan civilians & prisoners by Australian soldiers …. we strongly condemn such acts, & call for holding them accountable".

To drive the point home, Zhao included a fake photo of an Australian soldier holding a knife to a child's throat over an Afghan flag.

Its sheer ballsiness was calculated pitch-perfectly to offend the government's honour, provoke reaction, and (this is the real trap) wedge the Australian electorate into two camps.

The aim, from Beijing's point of view, is to shift attention from Australians' increasingly bipartisan anger at their economic bullying and divide the country roughly into two camps: On the one side the China hawks, mostly on the right, who think we should keep going hard in our dealings with the CCP and give them no quarter.

And on the other, the doves, whose instincts are to think that if we've got a problem with another nation, it's probably our fault, and who tend to hold common cause with an Australian left that's happy to see anyone take the near-sacred place of Australia's military down a peg.

This faction has been increasingly in evidence as things have heated up between our two nations.

Last week commentators on the left were quick to blame the Morrison government's diplomacy, and not China's claims against Australia's sovereignty, for increased tariffs on Australian wine.

If we'd just given in, everything would be fine, is the implication. The same goes for those who say we should never have taken the lead on demanding an investigation of the origins of the COVID-19 pandemic.

You can understand how China might think they'd get what they think is a fair hearing in some quarters here.

As a strategy it's a direct echo of the old Soviet Union which, during the Cold War, sought to distract attention from its own human rights horror show by pointing to America's civil rights dramas and the plight of Blacks living in the inner city.

After all, they would ask, how can you complain about gulags when there are ghettos just down the road from the White House?

There's an added bonus, too, for Beijing: The tweet is a real turnabout on China's long, ongoing complaint that Western nations like Australia need to stop judging their human rights record by our standards.

"How do you like them apples?", Zhao's tweet all but taunts. That's why we need to be careful.

Scott Morrison was absolutely right to fire up about the issue. His description of the tweet as "repugnant" doesn't begin to plumb its raw grossness, but his statement that China should be "totally ashamed" will get him nowhere with a communist dictatorship that is entirely shameless.

Likewise, it was heartening to see Labor rise to the occasion and similarly condemn China.

But just as a small child feels power in pushing his parents' buttons and making them lose their temper, so too will Beijing delight in Australia's rage. Particularly given that Beijing has spent the last year in a spluttering temper against Australia.

That's why, if China has decided that it wants to play at the table of human rights, we should take them at their word.

This doesn't mean directing -Foreign Minister Marise Payne to wear out her thumbs tweeting abuse at Beijing.

But it does mean that we can say, fine, we are not perfect, but that we would put our human rights record up against China's any day of the week.

Here the government can calmly and rationally address the -nation and the world and say things too many people don't like to hear, despite there being clear proof for anyone who cares to look for it.

Things such as China harvests -organs. And China maintains concentration camps. And China uses slave labour. And China takes hostakes.

And that China has its sights set on dominating Taiwan and the Pacific, and it will be very bad news for Australia if their plans come off.

Indeed, the consequences will be far harsher than mean tweets or more expensive consumer goods. And it's a question of pay now, or pay later.
---
THE COVID FILES RESEARCH LINKS LIBERAL MP Sarah Henderson says all virus research with foreign nationals should be stopped until a safety and national security review is done.

The call from a member of the Morrison government follows revelations by The Daily Telegraph that the CSIRO's bio-containment facility in Geelong, Victoria has been engaging in research, jointly funded by the Australian and Chinese governments, in conjunction with the Wuhan Institute of Virology which is now the centre of a global probe into the origins of the COVID-19 outbreak. Ms Henderson told The Daily Telegraph the partnership was "very concerning" from a security and safety perspective.

"I am calling on the CSIRO's Australian Animal Health Laboratory - now known as the Australian Centre for Disease Preparedness - to conduct a full review into its virus research program involving foreign nationals so as to consider all of the national security and biosecurity risks," "This sort of research involving foreign nationals should be put on hold until the review is conducted." Ms Henderson spoke of major security concerns laboratories in the US and Canada had faced, including attempts to steal virus samples to send back to China, and said a security review should be done of CSIRO's lab, adding: "The cyber security of our high containment laboratories also needs to be reviewed." "In January this year, a Harvard professor and two Chinese scientists based in Boston were charged with assisting the Chinese government," she said. "One of the researchers was arrested at an airport on his way to China with 21 vials of biological samples in his bag." Ms Henderson said while there was no suggestion that any incident occurred at the laboratory in Geelong, this type of research also carried with it very high risks including the threat of a pandemic.

"In 2016, the US Government Accountability Office identified that -improved oversight of dangerous pathogens in high containment laboratories was required to mitigate risk," she said.

"In 2019, the Bulletin of Atomic Scientists identified that human error in high---bio containment laboratories was a likely pandemic threat. It makes clear that incidents causing potential exposures to pathogens occur frequently in high security laboratories - like the one in Wuhan." A CSIRO spokesman said it had no current research involving live bats. Senior Shadow Cabinet member Joel Fitzgibbon has backed the call for an investigation into the source of COVID-19."Everyone wants a proper independent arms length inquiry into where the coronavirus originated and how it came to be in our population," he told Sky News.
---
TIES between Australian researchers and the Chinese military need to be stopped in the interest of national security, says National Party Senator Matt Canavan.

He said recent reports within Australian and from around the world had raised serious concerns about co-operation with Chinese government-connected researchers An exclusive report in The Daily Telegraph recently outlined how China's People's Liberation Army has been involved in scientific research, co-funded by the Australian government, into the origins of the coronavirus which has been published in esteemed medical journals.

In an explosive revelation, a study co-funded by the Australian Research Council and the Chinese government, and trumpeted by The University of Sydney as helping to solve the puzzle of how COVID-19 transferred from animals to humans, relied on a key laboratory in an institute in the People's Liberation Army's Academy of Military Medical Sciences to conduct its "genetic sequencing" and "virus isolation".

The director of the microbiology institute, Professor Wu-Chan Cao has the rank of colonel and is a Wuhan Institute of Virology board member in a clear conflict of interest.

Mr Canavan told Sky News commentator Sharri Markson he believed co-operation between Chinese government researchers and Australian scientists should be stopped.

"Your reports along with several other we have seen over the past year have raised serious concerns about the use with which joint research which occurs between China and other western nations is being put to for potentially military, counter intelligence applications and in this case in terms of health as well," Mr Canavan said.

"I think the reports are serious enough that we should suspend research co-operation with Chinese government-connected researchers." Senator Canavan said while there would be exceptions "if it's more general and non-urgent research we need to know a lot more about these connections and what use that such intellectual property is put to."
---
DIPLOMACY ON THE MENU

A SENIOR Chinese diplomat has claimed COVID-19 may not have originated in Wuhan, accused Australia of "whining" about Beijing's influence and denied it is using "bullying" trade tactics.

In a rare public appearance, deputy head of mission at the Chinese Embassy Minister Wang Xining acknowledged the coronavirus was first "identified" and "reported" in Wuhan, but that did not mean it was the source.

"I think it is up to the -scientists to find out the origin, and also how it has been dealt with by different governments," he said.

Mr Wang described Australia's proposal for an independent inquiry into the coronavirus pandemic as "shocking" and claimed it "hurts the feelings" of Chinese people.

The top Chinese diplomat was served up a meal of Australian beef and barley with a side of red wine ahead of his speech at the National Press Club in Canberra Wednesday - a not so subtle reference to the three sectors Beijing has targeted in its escalating trade war. But he dismissed suggestions Australia was being "targeted" with trade sanctions due to its pursuit of a COVID-19 -inquiry, saying the recent launch  of an investigation into wine was not  a -"coercive move" by the Chin-ese Government.

Mr Wang also defended China's controversial programs, including Confucius -Institutes and the Belt and Road Initiative, warning Australia would not "enjoy today's economic affluence, cultural diversity and intellectual richness" without "accepting some foreign influence".

"I think people are smart enough to decide what influence is good and worth considering and what is bad and must be fended off," he said.

"It won't affect Australians' own choice of your political and social structure, I don't see any reason for whining about your constitutional -fragility and your intellectual vulnerability." Mr Wang also said China "respects the traditional relationship" between Australia and the US, acknowledging their share history during the war.

"To have an alliance is not a problem," he said. But he indicated there was a problem if Australia turned on a "a third party with the strength of that alliance" with the US.

In his speech Mr Wang said Australia and China may "disagree on some issues" but the partnership will not be "wrecked" as long as goodwill was presented.

Mr Wang conceded it was "no easy task" to keep a partnership in "good shape". "It takes concerted determination and joint effort to make it thrive," he said. "A married couple knows this," he said.

"While a rift between husband and wife hurts one family, a rift between two countries hurts millions." Liberal MP Dave Sharma told The Daily Telegraph it was "inconsistent" of China to "carry on about their own feelings" while accusing Australia of "whining".

"I don't consider us standing up for Australian interests as whining," he said. Mr Sharma said China was not doing itself any favours by trying to spread "alternative theories" about the source of COVID-19.

"I think it discredits China, a country that has aspirations to global leadership," he said.

Mr Sharma said Australian ministers had been "very upfront" about their desire to speak with Chinese counterparts labelling Mr Wang's claims the lack of communication was only due to protocol was "disingenuous".

"I welcome his calls for a constructive, forward looking relationship, but obviously to have that you end to be prepared to talk to one another." Acting Chief Medical Officer Professor Paul Kelly said the Australian government was "very interested" in the -origins of COVID-19 to ensure lessons can be learned for -future pandemics.

"We know that the first cases reported … came from Wuhan," he said. University of Sydney foreign relations expert Professor James Curran told The Daily Telegraph the overall tone of Mr Wang's speech indicated a "significant" shift away from the aggressive language deployed by Chinese officials in recent months. "We may well be seeing the beginning of a thaw to the deep freeze into which Beijing has put (our) relationship," he said.
---
The Wuhan coronavirus has hit us for six, and we need to know just where it came from - but we should also note the words of Tony Abbott, who raised the alarm in 2005

We can be proud of the fact that it was our Prime Minister who made the first call, anywhere in the world, to label the Chinese disease as a pandemic.

Now, sensibly, he is asking powerful world leaders, including China, to consider an independent committee headed by a world health expert to inquire into the origins of the outbreak.

In a perverted sense of logic, elements of the Chinese administration want an inquiry, down the track, by the World Health Organisation, the same outfit which, despite reports circulating as early as December about the virus, failed to investigate.

Indeed, the WHO, right up to mid-January, publicly endorsed Chinese insistence that there was no human-to-human transmission.

The former New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani, speaking on New York talkback radio last month, was not far off the mark when he said: "They sent over a million people around the world - 1.5 million - almost like ambassadors carrying the disease … what's wrong with them? They have no conscience. It's really a tragedy. This is directly caused by the Chinese Communist Government and by the choices they made …" I have spoken before about the American social scientist Steven Mosher. Admittedly, he has a bit of a cloudy academic past, but only because he has done extensive research work in China.

He is the founding member of an outfit called "A Committee on the Present Danger: China".

Mosher wrote a piece on February 22 referring to an emergency meeting held by Chairman Xi in which the Chairman reportedly said, among other things, that lab safety is "a national security issue".

Chairman Xi did not admit that the coronavirus had escaped from one of the country's bio-research labs.

But Mosher did write, re the virus escaping: "The very next day, evidence emerged suggesting this is exactly what happened as the Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology released a new directive titled Instructions on Strengthening Biosecurity Management in Microbiology Labs that handle Advanced Viruses like the Novel Coronavirus." There is only one microbiology lab in China that handles "advanced viruses", which is in Wuhan.

No one is suggesting that the viruses were made and let loose. On the contrary, Mosher argues that a senior researcher, Major General Chen, was dispatched to Wuhan, suggesting that the coronavirus may have escaped from the National Biosafety Laboratory which is part of the Wuhan Institute of Virology.

She was sent to put the genie back in the bottle, so to speak. Mosher argues that China first blamed the seafood market, not the wet market, not far from the Institute of Virology, even though the first documented cases of COVID-19 involved people who had never set foot in the seafood market.

Was this one of the many cover-ups?

Mosher argues that China pointed to snakes, bats and even a cute scaly little anteater called a pangolin as the source of the virus.

But, snakes don't carry corona-viruses and bats aren't sold at the seafood market.

The evidence he said, therefore, points to research being carried out at the Wuhan Institute of Virology and he further argues the virus may have been carried out of the lab by an infected worker or crossed over into human beings when they unknowingly dined on a lab animal.

The point is simple.

A world inquiry is urgent.

And it must be an inquiry conducted by an entity that does not offer China the power of veto.

THE WORLD NEEDS TO KNOW While sections of the Trump Administration are arguing that the naturally occurring virus came out of a laboratory, rather than a wet market, they are not arguing that this was deliberate, but rather accidental, consistent with what Mosher is arguing.

This makes Scott Morrison's call even more urgent.

Let us not forget that it was on February 13 that the Chinese Embassy in Canberra was expressing "deep regret and dissatisfaction" over Australian restrictions on travel from China.

You and I know we most probably should have imposed such restrictions much earlier.

But the Chinese Embassy was saying these were "extreme measures which were an over-reaction".

What is China likely to do while it perceives America and Europe, with people dying, as being dangerously incapacitated economically?

It is clear that the Chinese Communist Party is determined to emerge from COVID-19 in a stronger, strategic position than pre-coronavirus.

We can't afford China to grow strategically stronger simply because of the West's conspicuous economic weakness.

ABBOTT SAW IT COMING It would do no harm to dust off a speech made by Tony Abbott, as Health Minister, in May, 2005, in Ottawa, in which he argued: "It's impossible to say if and when and how a pandemic might develop, but it could be a worldwide biological version of the Indian Ocean tsunami." Tony Abbott drew attention, at an infectious diseases conference, to the fact "worldwide Spanish flu killed an estimated 40 million people compared to 15 million killed in the Great War".

He wrote: "In the United States … where it struck early, it's estimated the virus severely affected 25 per cent of the then population of 105 million with 650,000 deaths." I say this only because we tend to forget the brutality of such numbers. Wrote Tony Abbott at that time, 2005: "Manning Clark's History of Australia reports that in January, 1919, theatres, picture shows, pubs, race meetings and schools were closed until further notice and that people were advised to wear masks over their faces in public … 12,000 deaths in hospital made comparatively little impact alongside the 61,000 deaths in battle that the young nation had just suffered, even though 60 per cent of the flu victims were aged between 20 and 45." Prophetically he said: "Although the WHO would formally declare that any new pandemic had broken out, it may be prudent for Australia to commence border security measures beforehand." Well though we have done, many would argue we could have closed our borders much earlier.

Abbott said: "Once a decision to impose border security measures had been made, every incoming passenger would be required to make a health declaration; thermal scanners would operate at international airports to detect possible flu cases on entry and quarantine isolation areas would be established." Did this happen?

Abbott made the further point: "Not since World War II have Australians had to cope with very large numbers of premature deaths. Australians are unused to contemplating the possibility of death on a massive scale … it is hard to discuss potential dis-asters outside people's ordinary experience without generating the sort of lurid headlines which make some scoff and others panic." "It's important," he wrote, "not to overreact to potential threats. On the other hand … people and their governments need to take credible threats seriously and take reasonable and proportionate precautions against them. If a deadly flu pandemic ever seems imminent, no preparations will be enough." Abbott, in 2005, very much ahead of his time.

Surely, in any "National Cabinet", Tony Abbott's knowledge would be invaluable.

BATTY OVER BATS One final point which disturbs all Australians.

Why, when push turns to shove, do bats come first and human beings -second? These things are vermin, they are pests and they are dangerous. Here in Australia we now have 97 deaths, and the whole world is talking about wet markets and bats.

What do we do?

Well, farmers and landholders are prohibited from eradicating bats. Yet they excrete a virus, a deadly virus, more often than usual in stressful situations. We're talking about the Coronavirus.

What about the Hendra Virus?

It kills.

And Lyssavirus?

It kills.

Yet governments protect bats; but we don't protect people.

There is no treatment for bat Lyssavirus, which results in paralysis, delirium, convulsions and death.

Why are animal rights activists heard over the pleas of the public, parents and landowners?

Bats, here as in China, are killing people.

Doing nothing is not an option.Listen to the Alan Jones Breakfast Program on 2GB weekdays from 5.30am-9am
---
AT the same ground where they were the first victims of a COVID-19 lockout, the Australian men's team will 270 days later become the first sporting side in NSW to return to playing in front of a full house.

Tuesday's final Twenty20 international will now be played at a 100 per cent capacity SCG, and there is a sense of symmetry about cricket becoming the first beneficiary of the State Government's announcement that fans are finally allowed back in force.

The decision is also great news for undefeated Sydney boxer Tim Tszyu, whose fight against New Zealander Bowyn Morgan on December 16 will now be staged before 30,000 fans at Bankwest Stadium.

Cricket Australia had been operating on a 50 per cent capacity for Sydney, but in the coming days it will release a flood of extra tickets to make the Indian T20 on December 8 one of the biggest sporting spectacles of the year.

On the back of the Queensland Government opening up for a capacity State of Origin crowd, NSW has now joined the party in time for January's marquee Sydney Test to be sold as the full-capacity showpiece organisers feared might not be possible.

The Australian players wouldn't have forgotten the eerie experience of walking out onto the SCG on March 13 to a completely empty stadium for an ODI against New Zealand. But on Tuesday, that day zero of the pandemic's crippling impact on sport in Australia will feel like a distant memory when upwards of 40,000 are invited back to the SCG.

"The Aussie men's team were the first in the country to play to a locked out stadium when the pandemic struck in March," CA executive -Anthony Everard said. "Now, nine months later and at the very same venue, we will be the first sporting team to play to a full stadium in NSW following confirmation of Wednesday's announcement by the NSW Government.

"Tickets for Tuesday's T20 international sold out within hours when capacity was at 50 per cent, and we anticipate similarly high levels of interest when the new tickets are released. A series that has broken records on and off the field deserves a full house and that is exactly what we will have for the final T20." The NSW Government has been pivotal in cricket's big start to the summer. The state has come to the rescue to allow the Australian and Indian teams to train while in quarantine, and also hosted the successful WBBL season.

Gladys Berejiklian's 100 per cent stadium announcement comes into effect on Monday, and won't apply to the second T20 at the SCG, which takes place on Sunday.

Meanwhile, one of the biggest boxing events staged in Australia has just got bigger.

Dubbed the Sydney Super Fight, Tszyu will fight under lights on December 16 as part of a card involving the heavyweight showdown between Paul Gallen and Mark Hunt.

The easing of restrictions means up to 30,000 fans can now attend live when Tszyu takes his next step towards a world title against Morgan.

However, there will still be restrictions when it comes to the number of corporates who can attend those areas of the stadium that are indoors.

While a full house remains unlikely, event organisers have been buoyed by the opportunity to fit more spectators into the event.

MAJOR EVENTS FROM MONDAY CRICKET ■ Dec 8: Twenty20: Australia v India, SCG ■ Jan 7-11 Test Match: Australia v India, SCG BOXING ■ Dec 16: Tim Tszyu v Bowyn Brown/Paul Gallen v Mark Hunt, Bankwest Stadium A-LEAGUE ■ Dec 27: Western Sydney v Macarthur FC, Bankwest Stadium ■ Dec 30: Sydney FC v Melbourne City, ANZ Stadium ■ Jan 1: Western Sydney v Western United, Bankwest ■ Jan 3: Macarthur FC v Central Coast, Campbelltown Stadium
---
A POWERFUL British -politician has been seeking support from Australia for a co-ordinated "rethink" by western countries to their "unbalanced relationship" with China after it covered up the coronavirus pandemic.

Iain Duncan Smith (pictured), a former Conservative Party leader, has been putting in the foundations for a new approach to China after the disaster of COVID-19. The China hawk said he had been talking to Australian politicians about his campaign for a tougher line on the -Communist nation.

"There needs to be a complete rethink on our unbalanced relationship with China," he said.

And he said it was inevitable that there would be an -independent inquiry into the origins of COVID-19, which Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison has demanded."I'm sure there will be a full inquiry and there will be a full inquiry into the behaviour of the World Health Organisation in the early months, but that's a matter for the -government," he said.
---
DAMNING new information about the level of access provided by the Chinese government to WHO investigators has cast further doubt on the health body's early report into the origins of COVID-19, and is fuelling potential "conspiracy theories" about the virus that the government in Beijing has sought to squelch.

According to reports from members of the World Health Organisation's team, which last week completed a tightly controlled investigation in and around the disease's epicentre in Wuhan, Chinese -officials broke with protocol and refused to give investigators data on 174 COVID-19 cases from the early phase of the pandemic.

One of the scientists, Australian microbiologist Dominic Dwyer, told The Wall Street Journal: "They showed us a couple of examples, but that's not the same as doing all of them, which is standard epidemiological investigation." "So then, you know, the interpretation of that data becomes more limited from our point of view, although the other side might see it as being quite good," he said.

China's unwillingness to share raw data, say experts, means the job of figuring out precisely where COVID-19 originated, including whether it could have escaped accidentally during "gain-of-function" experiments at the controversial Wuhan Institute of Virology, becomes that much harder.

"Key to discovering the origins of COVID-19 is to find Patient Zero, the first human to be infected with COVID-19 virus," Flinders University vaccine developer Nikolai Petrovsky said. "The mystery is why would China seek to withhold such vital information from the committee.

"Sometimes the data you cannot obtain says more than the data you can. China withholding such important information from the panel only helps fuel the impression they have something to hide." A spokesman for federal Health Minister Greg Hunt said the government was waiting for the WHO's final report before passing judgment. "These are very complex and detailed studies which are yet to be completed, and we appreciate the efforts of the scientific experts leading this work in difficult circumstances," he said.
---
KANGAROOS coach Mal Meninga has urged the NRL to sell rugby league to the world as Craig Bellamy and Daly Cherry-Evans backed plans for a historic cross-code showdown against the All Blacks.

Meninga said that the COVID-19 crisis had provided the NRL with a silver lining because a Kangaroos-All Blacks contest could attract more than one billion viewers.

He has been aware of the All Blacks-Kangaroos proposal - dubbed "HISTORY" - for the past year and he first discussed the idea with former NRL boss Todd Greenberg.

Greenberg was a fan of the concept, believing Meninga's Kangaroos could leverage the All Blacks brand by promoting the NRL to the 120 countries around the world that play rugby union.

ARL Commission boss Peter V'landys received an initial offer on Monday and the commission is expected to make a decision in the next two weeks.

The NZR and NRL are weighing up multimillion--dollar offers to put to both -organisations and Meninga -believes the All Blacks-Kangaroos epic can take rugby league to a global audience.

"This game would take the Kangaroos to the world," Meninga (pictured) said. "Rugby league people know how great our athletes are in the NRL and this would give our game global recognition. I'm keen to make this happen.

"I would love to see the famous green-and-gold Kangaroos jumper playing against the All Blacks. Hopefully we can get the concept off the ground.

"The best from our game versus the best from the New Zealand game … let's do it." Mindful of the political ramifications, Meninga was sworn to secrecy on the deal. Last week, he carefully consulted Australian players on whether they would be interested in playing a one-off Test against New Zealand later this year.

What Kangaroos players weren't aware of is that the end-of-year Test Meninga proposed was against New Zealand's All Blacks.

Queensland Origin captain Daly Cherry-Evans said the prospect of taking on the All Blacks would be a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.

"Anything like that, where there's an opportunity to grow the game of rugby league and in particular at a time like now, I think it's a great idea," he said.

"It would be unreal, great to look back on and experience something like that." Storm super coach Craig Bellamy would relish seeing the NRL's elite stars going toe-to-toe with All Blacks players before a possible 50,000 sellout crowd at Suncorp Stadium.

"I'd love to watch that," he said. "I'm not quite sure how they're going to do that, how they decide what the rules are going to be.

"Whether they go 13 (players) or 15 or 14. So there are a few things to sort out there. I wouldn't like to be a rugby league player on the bottom of one of those mauls.

"Mal might need to get his players used to that and get ready for that because that would be an ugly place to be if you're not used to it." With the All Blacks likely to be prevented from travelling to the northern hemisphere, NZR chief executive Mark Robinson confirmed he had fielded a proposal to take on the Kangaroos. "It's one of many different scenarios in a unique year like this that we're considering," Robinson said.
---
WHEN former South Sydney and Roosters grade player Troy Rugless wanted to teach resilience and sacrifice to his two talented sporting sons, he turned to Adam Goodes and Andrew Johns.

The superstars of two football codes - "immortals in their respective sports" - have experienced a lot off the field and come out the other side, Rugless told The Saturday Telegraph.

Rugless's connections to both men led to a skills session - prior to the COVID-19 lockdown - for his boys in Bronte in Sydney's eastern suburbs.

"They are the perfect people to teach my sons about the sacrifices, resilience and the realities of being an athlete," said Rugless, who also played professional rugby league in the UK.

His eldest boy, Kobe, 18, is a highly rated hooker who plays under-20s for the Sydney Roosters. He has been in the Roosters' system since he was 14 and has represented NSW under 16s and Australia at Oztag.

He also won two Australian boxing titles - his first one after just five bouts - and was part of a six-man squad projected to compete at the 2020 Tokyo Olympics before opting to concentrate on league.

Younger brother Zane, a versatile outside back, is rated by Storm skipper Cameron Smith's manager Isaac Moses as one of the best 14-year-olds he has seen.

He played up a year in the Sydney Roosters' Harold Matthews (under 16s) and has represented NSW in Oztag.

"We are indigenous and as a role model I couldn't ask for anyone better than Adam," Rugless said.

"He is an amazing human being and his kicking skills have been very useful. "Joey also did some skills with the boys and they loved it." Rugless first met an 18-year-old Goodes on a community trip to regional NSW during his time at South Sydney. Goodes spent a week in the bush talking to schoolkids about the benefits of hard work to succeed at the top level.

Rugless was impressed by the teen's maturity - and decades on, he insists nothing has altered.

"Adam hasn't changed at all," he said about Goodes, who won two AFL premierships with the Sydney Swans and two Brownlow Medals as the game's best player.

Goodes also endured appalling racism through his 17-year career with the Swans and called it out in an acclaimed documentary last year entitled The Final Quarter.

"I really respect him," Rugless said. "He is a great role model, especially for indigenous kids.

"He is an Australian of the Year, a successful businessman, but he is such a humble person." Rugless has kept in contact with Johns since meeting him during his own his playing career.

They became close in 2010 when the former Newcastle Knights and NSW halfback was embroiled in a racism row. Timana Tahu left a NSW Origin camp in protest at Johns, working as an assistant coach for the Blues, making a racist slur against Queensland's indigenous centre Greg Inglis during a team session.

Despite the controversy, Rugless maintained he knew a different Joey. It's why he invited Johns to speak to his A-grade footy side at La Perouse, where he was coaching.

"The situation wasn't good, but I knew Joey and I knew that wasn't him," he said. "Joey apologised for what happened. People make mistakes and you get on with it.

"It is about recognising what happened, owning up and learning from it."I think my boys can also learn a lot from that."
---
Sydney's Chinese Consulate has lately sent a series of angry emails to The Daily Telegraph, demanding various apologies and retractions. Little did they know …

In a daring counterespionage manoeuvre, covert Daily Telegraph operatives recently installed an array of secret microphones and cameras throughout Sydney's Chinese Consulate.

These devices, cunningly hidden inside Aldi shopping bags, have enabled The Daily Telegraph to build a comprehensive and totally imaginary picture of activities and events within the Consulate's heavily-guarded walls.

Many of those activities and events, as it turns out, directly involve this very newspaper. Please commit these top-secret revelations to memory and eat this document immediately afterwards.

April 2. Surveillance zone: the Chief of Official Truth's disinformation dissemination office. He has summoned an underling.

Chief: "Underling 215, have you completed the official Chinese government document that will crush the insolent Daily Telegraph and forever establish the innocence of the People's Republic over this whole COVID-19 nonsense?" 215: "Yes, sir!" (Hands document to the Chief.) Chief: "Let's see … 'origin of the virus undetermined' … 'effectiveness of China's epidemic prevention' … 'Daily Telegraph's ignorance, prejudice and arrogance' …. Very good. Email this to them at once." 215: "Yes, sir!" Chief: "And for God's sake, put some pants on." April 4. The Chief of Official Truth's office. Underling 215 is briefing the Chief on The Daily Telegraph's response.

215: "It is with regret that I inform you they have mocked us, sir." Chief: "Mocked?" 215: "Yes, sir. They have taken our heartfelt and entirely honest proof of COVID decency and turned it into a litany of alleged communist wrongdoings, sir." Chief: "This won't do at all! Draft another email, this time with … wait a minute. Wait just one minute. Are you wearing daisies in your hair?" 215: "Just trying to blend in with decadent Australian perverts, sir. For infiltration purposes." Chief: (long pause) "I suppose that's one way of putting it. Send another email - and make it irrefutable! Demand that it be published! The Daily Telegraph must be corrected!" April 15. A visibly tense Underling 215 prepares to tell the Chief about The Daily Telegraph's latest reaction to furious Consulate condemnation.

215: "I have good news, sir, and bad news." Chief: "Silence! I'm listening to Ray on GB." (Removes headphones, chuckling.) "My, I sure wouldn't want to be Malcolm Turnbull this morning. Heh! Now, what's this about good news?" 215: "The Daily Telegraph, sir. They have published our email, the one where we forcefully explain how the Wu … I mean, the American armed forces virus truly-ruly didn't come from China." Chief: "Excellent! And the bad news?" 215: "They, er, they did this to it." (Hands the paper to the Chief, showing how The Daily Telegraph used communist-style redactions to reverse its intended message.) Chief: "This is an outrage! This is the ultimate insult!" (Pauses, strokes chin.) "Still, it's quite an impressive job. Takes me back to the days when I was opinion censor at the People's Daily. My brother was the sports censor. And the guy who became head of the Hubei Province Doctor Disappearance Squad censored the horoscopes." 215: "Who was the editor, sir?" Chief: "We didn't have one. Just censors." (Strokes chin, gazes into middle distance.) "Good times." April 22. Surveillance zone: the Consulate's Great Hall. All staff are present for an emergency meeting.

Chief: "This time they have gone too far. This time they have completely … Underling 215! Stop stroking chin! Stop it!" Chin: "Thank you, sir." Chief: (gravely) "The Daily Telegraph has added coronavirus drawings to China's national emblem." 215: "But sir! The national emblem of China is the symbol of the People's Republic of China and is inviolable!" Chief: "Yes. And I want you to make exactly that point in … our next blistering email!" Chin: "Another email, sir?" Chief: (sighs) "I know. What's the point of being senior communist officials if we can't even shoot anybody? Anyway, command them to provide a public apology. Let's see how they like them apples." 215: "That reminds me, sir. Your package of Hubei-style apple sauce has arrived. Fresh from the Wuhan market." Entire room: "WUHAN?!" (Staff flee the Great Hall, upturning chairs and shoving each other aside as they rush for the exits.) April 23. A distressed and sobbing Underling 215 stands before the Chief of Official Truth.

Chief: "Get over it, 215. Chin's fatal trampling was a whole day ago." 215: "It's not that, sir. It's this." (Hands the Chief a copy of The Daily Telegraph). "They've called my email a … a … a … they've called it a 'pansygram', sir." Chief: "Hmmm. So they have. And they say here they're expecting another email 'from the Consulate's obedient tutu boys'." 215: "I'm a girl, sir!" (Runs from the office in tears.)Chief: (To himself) "Well, at least we know it's not just my office with a hidden camera in it."
---
CARING FOR OUR YOUTH AS PANDEMIC ENDS No person in Australia should be under any illusion as to why we all need to vaccinate when we hear news that emergency departments are witnessing an explosion in young people with self-harm issues and eating disorders (Teen self harm spike, 26/2).

The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic with its associated lockdowns and restrictions was always going to have damaging consequences on the emotional wellbeing and mental health of people, especially children and young people.

Research has found that a majority of young people with existing mental health needs found the pandemic had contributed to further deterioration.

Excessive reliance on social media to maintain social connections has further raised concerns about the impact of excessive screen time on development, particularly for younger children.

We are winning the pandemic war now and it is imperative that we do not leave any emotionally damaged child or young person behind.

Peter Penglis, Kambah, ACT """ It's all very well to address the burgeoning youth mental issue with more psychiatrists, registrars, mental health nurses and smoothing treatment pathways. But what about the problem? Why are kids having these issues? Could it be the insidious and unsafe nature of social media; our school system, which tends to accept teachings of world doom and gloom; cancel culture; or near hysterical climate zealotry and other such ideology, that kids are being swamped with. Treat the problems and some of these youth issues may diminish.

Peter Cattlin, Freshwater LIFELINE 13 11 14

US special envoy needs to respect our independence US President Joe Biden's climate change warrior and special envoy, John Kerry, must clearly explain how reducing our coal supply further will change the Earth's climate (Envoy's big dig at our coal, 26/2).

While I have great respect for the American people, some of their high-minded politicians need to respect the independence of other nations in regards to climate change decisions.

Australia has achieved much success with a cleaner environment and lowering CO2 emissions.

Perhaps it's a case of 'do as I say, not as I do' for envoy Kerry. R. Brown, Ballina

Our home-bred doomsayers Perhaps failed US presidential candidate John Kerry is not the only climate 'fool' (Election loser lashes out - Editorial, 26/2)?

Your editorial correctly singles out John Kerry and Al Gore for criticising Australia's use of fossil fuels, indicating both these climate alarmists lack the backbone to target "some rather obvious larger players"- let's say, China, which extensively relies on coal and emits colossal amounts of carbon dioxide.

This hypocrisy typifies the warped political debate surrounding climate, coal, and the very viability of our own economy.

Regrettably, Australia has many green 'doomsayer' politicians promoting similar 'road maps' to deindustrialisation. Australia needs to wake up.

Bob Partington, Wahroonga

Who will be real fossil fools?

Your story headlined "Envoy's big dig at our coal" (26/2) that included the panel headlined "Why we are no fossil fools", listed the benefits coal brings to our country via employment and revenue.

The problem is, the rest of the world couldn't care less about the benefits we Aussies gain from the sale of what is now regarded to be a toxic product.

Anyway, these sorts of highlights might rally the citizens on our home soil but will mean nothing when a worldwide embargo on the exportation of coal eventually comes into play.

Then we will find out who the "fossil fools" really are.

Robert May, Chester Hill

Young voice of reason Today I did what I do these day, I bought the Telegraph and bee-lined it to my favourite coffee shop on the banks of the beautiful Nepean River and prepared myself for a page-to-page briefing on this crazy world.

I habitually turn the pages to view Warren Brown's cartoon page and as usual he didn't disappoint. But something beneath the cartoon caught my eye.

A headline "No excuses; time to change" (Opinion, 26/2) and a photo of the story's author, Ash Learmonth.

This young man is the head prefect at Cranbrook Senior School, he calls himself a Cranbrookian.

Ash has a learning, a heart and soul way beyond his years. He also has a conscience about the terrible sexual abuse and equally terrible attitude he finds both within and beyond his school's doors - within the teenage boys today who, he says, have literally lost all sight and understanding of our young women.

I found his article dug deep into this old heart of mine.

He admits he doesn't have the answers and wasn't trying to 'preach', but his concern was palpable.

I urge every reader to access his comments. I'm sure his profound words of wisdom will give you cause to reflect on what has become a subject of great concern and none better expressed than by this young man.

Dave Burt, Kingswood

In a state of dishonesty Let's see if I have this correct. An agreement was reached last year by the board of the nation's treasurers (including Queensland's), an agreement I assume was signed by the treasurers of each state (We just want a fair go - Anna Caldwell, 26/2).

Watching the news I saw Queensland's Health Minister Steven Miles tearing up this agreement and saying Queensland would not pay $30m owed to NSW for accommodating Queensland residents during the pandemic when Queensland refused to open its borders, unless the federal government approved (and I assume also pay for) a national quarantine hub in Toowoomba.

Firstly, I believe the agreement constitutes a contract. Accordingly, if Queensland refuses to pay the NSW government should sue the Queensland government for breach of contract.

Secondly, if approval is given to build the quarantine hub will it be for everyone regardless of where they come from or will it be for Queenslanders only, like their hospitals?

B. Thompson, Cowra

Cringing north of border Surely the honest and principled citizens of Queensland must cringe at the behaviour of their Premier and Treasurer.

They know that NSW is being cheated out of money owed by their state for the hotel quarantining of their returning travellers.

As Anna Caldwell states, we didn't indulge in "NSW hotels are for NSW people" a phrase their Premier used against the residents of northern NSW who urgently needed to go to their hospitals during the pandemic (We just want a fair go - Opinion, 26/2).

Surely the decent Queenslanders can't endorse, in any way, the ripping up of our invoice by their juvenile and churlish Treasurer.

Maybe we could credit the $30m owed and reissue a new invoice to include the costs of NSW Police and NSW Health services to reflect a more realistic figure.

Marg Swindells, Castle Hill

Briefly ...

Let's give Queensland a deal that whomever loses the Origin series this year pays for the winner's quarantine bills.

Teddy Bankstown """ Well, what do you know? No charges to be laid against Tiger Woods for his high-speed car crash (Lucky to have lived, 26/2). Looks like Tiger can drive as fast as he likes, on and off the golf course.

Ian Peterson, Frenchs Forest

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
Could we please be spared this petulant, belligerent and immature behaviour? No, I'm not referring to Donald Trump's unhinged inability to graciously respect democracy.

To think we considered it a bellyache deciding between Malcolm Turnbull and Bill Shorten. Oh, those poor Yanks, we tittered.

But then "textgate" dialled down our smug.

We now have our own obnoxious subplot unfolding Down Under courtesy of the spat between Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk and her NSW counterpart Gladys Berejiklian.

It apparently all started when Berejiklian, in yet another attempt to end the border wars, texted Palaszczuk.

"Hi Annastacia. Congratulations on your election win. I can imagine how difficult that was during a pandemic! Hope we can work together to get our borders open. Gladys," the text, sent at 8pm on Sunday, said.

Perhaps offended that her nemesis didn't call her, Palaszczuk allegedly left the NSW leader on "read" until Wednesday. "Queenslander!" she reportedly texted back in a burn at her state's victory in State of Origin.

Gladys was not happy, Ann.

"I didn't know whether to be shocked or bemused, frankly, because I'm worried about jobs and I'm worried about people not seeing their families," she said.

"And she just rubbed in the fact that Queensland won the game; that's fine. She didn't mention borders, she didn't mention a thanks for the congratulations." On Friday, the Queensland leader snapped back, saying: "I'm always happy to speak to Gladys, she has my phone number. It's misleading for her to go and tell the media that she had phoned me when she did not phone me.

"Every NSW and Queensland premier has had bets and talked about the State of Origin and obviously NSW was a little bit upset that the mighty Maroons won." It would all be laughable, if livelihoods and lives weren't so at stake. Instead, we are subjected to a Taylor Swift v Katy Perry petty feud. This isn't Mean Girls. No one comes out of this looking good. Read the room, Berejiklian. It's only been a week since Palaszczuk's historic third-term win at the Queensland state election.

She romped home on a platform of absolutely nothing, other than keeping the borders closed.

No Budget, no viable plan for economic recovery, no new measures to address domestic violence. Just a conveniently deluded promise to keep Queenslanders "safe" from COVID-19.

She gave the majority of Queenslanders what they wanted to hear. And they voted for her.

Certainly Berejiklian and her staffers knew it was too soon to force the border issue, no matter how necessary the conversation is. And a text message? That's harsh. Even Scott Morrison managed to telephone Jacinda Ardern to personally congratulate her on her recent win.

Likewise, Palaszczuk could do with behaving more like an elected head of state, than a Real Housewife. The portfolio of pathetic jibes is being capably covered by her deputy manchild Steven Miles.

I've mediated more articulate disagreements between my three-year-old twins fighting over whose turn it is to play with a twerking llama toy.

Just as in our household in moments of crisis we turn to the gospel of life lessons, the two leaders could also take a few lessons from Bluey.

In a new episode of the beloved children's cartoon, Bluey and her sister Bingo bicker over how to cross "lava".

"I think let's try where I agree with me and you agree with you," Bluey suggests.

But their attempts to navigate the treacherous living room floor solo (a metaphor for the handling of border closures if ever there was one) fails.

"Maybe we should just agree with each other on everything," Bluey finally concludes.

But the sad and inevitable fallout from both premiers' behaviour is to continue to demean female politicians.

Both leaders have had their share of gender swipes.

Berejiklian faced criticism over her choice of boyfriend and Palaszczuk copped a misogynistic attack at her childlessness and penchant for designer clothes.

The last thing we need is to return Australian politics to the era where women are too emotional and dramatic to hold office.

Come on, ladies. You are both better than this. Australia is better than this. To quote Veep's Selina Meyer: "How about for once in your life you stop whining, you stop complaining and you just man up."
---
Eyes of rugby world will be on the Waratahs and Reds FOR Reds and Tahs it's Back to the Future!

Super Rugby AU kicks off on Friday and a Reds-Waratahs blockbuster is a fitting way to usher in a new era for the game.

The eyes of the rugby world will be on two of our oldest and most fierce rivals as rugby emerges out the other side of the COVID-19 shutdown.

Super Rugby AU is just the second rugby competition in the world to return to action, providing a rare chance for our teams and players to take centre stage.

With new laws being trialled and an All-Aussie format, Super Rugby AU can re-energise the game in this country after some turbulent times.

The game's challenges have been well-documented and there are certainly still hurdles for Rugby Australia and its players to clear.

On Friday night, players will be playing with an uncertain future ahead of them, a need to impress like never before, for their own security and that of the sport in the long-term.

Rugby has been in this place before, on the cusp of something that will be hugely influential in the sport's future.

In the 1990s, the game was at a crossroads.

Out of that juncture came professionalism and, ultimately, Super Rugby. This too can be a defining moment for the sport and it is only appropriate that the new world begins with the sport's most historic rivalry.

I know from my experience playing for Queensland that NSW games carry incredible weight.

Some years, encounters with our southern rivals stirred up more emotion for me than a Test match because of the well-trodden history between the two sides.

That passion for the jersey, on both sides of the border, still very much exists in this generation of players.

NSW began their rev-up early, bringing Origin great Paul Gallen into their camp to talk about the pressures of the rivalry between the two states.

It was a good move by the Waratahs. As a player, when you get successful athletes from other walks of life come and talk to you, you can take different things away that you can add to your own -preparation.

It may just be one or two small things, but that could prove the winning difference.

Make no mistake, a Gallen address will give the Waratahs a dose of extra fire when they run out on Friday night. We'll know in the first 10 minutes of the match if Gallen's address worked for the Tahs.

Queensland will need to be ready for that and with their own Origin hero in Brad Thorn inside their camp, they certainly will be.

While their interstate history might be long and storeyed, this is also a glimpse of the future.

Wallabies coach Dave Rennie will be watching this match as a Wallabies audition and a battle for a gold jersey, both this year and in years to come.

Queensland probably have a slight edge when it comes to the development of their young crop, many of whom now have two or more seasons of Super Rugby under their belt.

The Waratahs will be even younger than they were in Super Rugby earlier this year, a number of injuries compounding the absence of vice-captain, Kurtley Beale.

Queensland must give NSW respect but they will be aware that in key positions the Waratahs are still very green.

On the flip side, the loss of Izack Rodda, Harry Hockings and Isaac Lucas has left Queensland with some big holes to fill as well.

Rodda was the enforcer within the Queensland pack and someone else will have to step up and take on this role.

Across the park there will be mouth-watering match- ups that could have Test implications - James O'Connor vs Will Harrison, Taniela Tupou vs Angus Bell and Michael Hooper vs Liam Wright to name a few.

With Beale gone, capped Wallaby Jack Maddocks has the chance to stand up and deliver at fullback for NSW, which I believe is his best -position.

Maddocks has admitted he is yet to fulfil his potential at the Waratahs and this is his chance to shine.

The incumbent Wallabies captain Michael Hooper should be wary of Queensland skipper Liam Wright, who will be keen to mark his name down on the Wallabies selectors' notepads.

Reds halves O'Connor and Tate McDermott loom as the potential game breakers if their pack can assert its -dominance early in the game.

2020 SUPER RUGBY AUSTRALIA ROUND 1 TOMORROW Reds v Waratahs 7.05pm Suncorp Stadium Commentary: Greg Clark, Phil Kearns, Tim Horan SATURDAY 7.15pm: Brumbies v Rebels 7.15pm GIO Stadium Commentary: Greg Clark, Phil Kearns, Rod Kafer New Zealand series SATURDAY 5.05pm: Highlanders v Crusaders SUNDAY Chiefs v Hurricanes 1.35pm FOX SPORTS More 507 Live and exclusive on Fox Sports
---
THE World Health Organisation has found it "impossible" to trace the origins of COVID-19 despite a 28-day investigation in Wuhan, dismissing suggestions it was leaked from a Chinese lab or came from a wet market.

The team handed down their findings at a press conference in Wuhan late yesterday, after a month of meetings and site visits in the Chinese city where the virus was first identified in December 2019.

WHO scientists, appearing alongside their Chinese counterparts, said the most likely possibility was that the virus had spilled over from an animal into humans or may have come from frozen food.

The findings appear to back Communist Party protestations that the virus may have originated from outside of its borders. Peter Ben Embarek, the head of the WHO mission, said: "The laboratory incident hypothesis is extremely unlikely to explain the introduction of the virus into the human population." Dr Embarek said the investigation had uncovered new information but had not dramatically changed the picture of the outbreak.

Liang Wannian, who heads the Chinese team of experts, ruled out the Huanan Seafood Market as an origin source, saying the virus could have been circulating in other regions of China several weeks before it was identified there.

"While some of the early cases had an association with the Huanan seafood market, others were associated with another market and some no market at all," Prof Liang said.

He said the team believed the virus originated in animals - likely bats or pangolins - but the intermediate hosts that allowed it to jump to humans were "yet to be identified".

He also said no bats in the wild in China had been found to be carrying viruses that may have mutated into COVID-19.

The virus could have been circulating in other regions before it was identified in Wuhan, he said. The WHO team agreed, with Dr Embarek adding: "The possible path from whatever original animal species, all the way through the Huanan market, could have taken a very long and convoluted path involving movement across borders, travels etc before arriving in the Huanan market."

KEY FINDINGS ■ Lab theory 'extremely unlikely' ■ Huanan Seafood Market unlikely to be original source of outbreak ■ Frozen food is being probed as a potential carrier of the virus ■ Study points to virus originating in bats - but it is unlikely they were in Wuhan
---
PARRAMATTA EELS V BRISBANE BRONCOS 7.50PM TONIGHT

FOOTY'S finally back and so are the fans - all 300 million of them watching in loungerooms around the world.

In what will be a watershed moment for rugby league, the NRL's stunning eight-game return over the next four days is set to be watched by a -record global TV audience of 300 million sport-starved people- in what is expected to be the largest TV ratings for a single round in the sport's 112-year history.

Industry insiders predict about 30 to 40 million people around the world would tune in to each bone-rattling match over the next four days as rugby league becomes the first football code in the -English-speaking world to -return to the playing fields and TV.

NRL matches will be shown in more than 70 countries, including the US, France, Britain, Papua New Guinea and Uganda.

At 7.50pm tonight when Brisbane and Parramatta kick off at Suncorp Stadium, rugby league will become just the third major sporting league in the world, along with football's K League in South Korea and Germany's Bundesliga, to resume post COVID-19.

Matches will also be shown in such far-flung countries as Nauru, Angola and The Netherlands-. Some countries have aired NRL games in recent years but matches have already been promoted heavily this week.

'UNIQUE OPPORTUNITY' The increase in viewership could not be accurately predicted but insiders believe it could be by as much as 40 to 50 per cent.

"There's certainly a unique opportunity to attract new fans to our game globally," acting NRL CEO Andrew Abdo said.

"While it has been the loyalty- of our fans here at home that has been driving us to resume the season, we will be one of only a few live sports around the world that will be playing in June and July.

"We know fans are craving live sport so we're excited about the global audience we could attract with the resumption of the competition and the exposure that will bring to our corporate partners.

"We are also expecting a strong take-up of the Watch NRL app which allows fans to stream games live throughout the world. It's a credit to our chairman Peter V'landys and the commission for their unwavering commitment to bring the game back on May 28." NRL officials hope to gain a slice of the massive US sports market during the NFL and NBA's shutdowns and have already seen a spike in media interest. An article on forbes.com this week was headlined: "Americans, this is why the NRL should be your new favourite sport." "Rugby league is the lesser-known but infinitely superior form of rugby and, if you like your sport high-octane, occasionally- violent, endlessly authentic and frequently spectacular, then you need to tune in this Thursday for National- Rugby League," it read.

"Rugby league is like watching the NFL, except after every down they immediately have to get up and do it again, with no break, and nobody wears padding."

A SIGNIFICANT SPIKE Ratings in coronavirus-hit England are also expected to spike significantly with Super League yet to recommence.

"About 80 to 90 million people would have access to the games in America and Europe-, maybe more," a TV source said. "From that you have to ask yourself how many would watch it.

"Many may not understand the game but they are craving live sport around the world right now.

"Australians are watching the Bundesliga. Why? Because it's the only live sport being shown. I would imagine about 30 to 40 million people would watch each game for longer than 15 minutes.

"That would be equivalent to watching one quarter of an NFL match. "Way back in 2011, State of Origin and the NRL grand final reached 40 million households in the US and 48 million through Europe.

"They might not come back when their preferred sport returns but, this weekend, they will be watching." The NRL has jumped back first ahead of the AFL and is the first sport to be played since March 23.

Despite the hype, Nine and Fox are reluctant to predict their NRL ratings in Australia for this round for fear they may fall short.

While fans will tune in, broadcasters will still have a challenge ahead to create the game-day atmosphere without supporters in the stands.

'GREAT TO BE BACK' Sydney Roosters coach Trent Robinson said ravenous sports fans around the world would tune into rugby league.

"There has been a lot of work from the NRL to get back on and we want to represent- our game well in some clear air space around the world," said Robinson.

"There has been some interest around rugby league from friends who live overseas. It will be good to get our game back on represented the right way. It's great to be back.

"We want to represent rugby league and there's no better game for us than Friday night's match against Souths to restart the season." Former NSW skipper and coach Laurie Daley knows the NRL cannot miss a wonderful opportunity: "This is a great chance to showcase our game to so many countries. We have known how great our game has been for years but now it's time for others to find out."

LEAGUE OF NATIONS CANADA Despite trailing behind rugby, Canada has enjoyed a rugby league revival since 2010 thanks to the inclusion of the former NRL star-studded Toronto Wolfpack in the Super League competition BROADCASTER: ROGER SPORTS NET

IRELAND Ireland boasts a World Cup league team still growing in strength, as evidenced by their solid 2017 showing.

BROADCASTER: Fox Sports

FRANCE In much the same way as Canada, French league has made major inroads after the UK Super League's addition of the Catalans Dragons.

BROADCASTER: BeIN Sports

USA League has had sporadic outings in the US, including the 1987 State of Origin in Long Beach and the 2018 Rugby League International Challenge between New Zealand and England in Denver. That match drew 19,320 fans but US viewers for tonight's game are expected to eclipse that figure by a long way. BROADCASTER: Fox Sports

UK The UK is currently a league powerhouse with the English Super League, but with the world's second-strongest comp still on hold amid the coronavirus crisis expect a massive spike in Brits tuning in for the NRL relaunch.

BROADCASTER: Skysports

AFRICA To be shown in 48 countries including Angola, Botswana, Congo Democratic Republic, Senegal, South Africa and Swaziland Despite being overshadowed slightly by South Africa's massive rugby union standing, French influence has led to the 13-man game flourishing in Gambia, Morocco, Nigeria and Ghana. BROADCASTER: Fox Sports

PNG The home of the Kumuls boasts some of the most frenzied footy supporters in the world, with their strengthening national team bolstered by the PNG Hunters' inclusion in the Intrust Super Cup.

BROADCASTER: Digicel/SKY Pacific/ TVWAN - Digicel TV

SAMOA Another growing Pacific powerhouse, Samoa has long boasted a number of NRL and Super League players, such as Bronco Anthony Milford and Eel Junior Paulo, who will both face off against each other in tonight's season relaunch opener.

BROADCASTER: TV3/Sky Pacific

TONGA The tiny Polynesian country is punching well above its weight with a new wave of passionate fans, following the dizzying rise of the star-studded national team, the Mate Ma'a, who have now beaten all top tier countries, including Australia.

BROADCASTER: Digicel/Sky Pacific

FIJI Possibly only behind PNG in terms of passionate supporters, Fiji is also known as nursery for some of the NRL's biggest stars, such as Maika Sivo and Semi Radradra.

BROADCASTER: Fiji Broadcasting Corporation/Sky Pacific NRL also showing in: Cook Islands, Kiribati, Nauru, Niue, American Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, Vanuatu and Micronesia.

NEW ZEALAND Warriors fans may have had little to cheer about in recent years, but league fans across the ditch will still be able to take in the considerable Kiwi talent scattered across the rest of the NRL from tonight.

BROADCASTER: Sky Pacific

INFLIGHT/INSHIP Worldwide - excluding Australia, NZ and Pacific Islands BROADCASTER: Sport 24
---
THE mood inside League Central yesterday, a day after the boss failed to return, was about as solemn as a Supreme Court photograph.

NRL head of football Graham Annesley had his weekly meeting with his football staff over Zoom and the questions were a little more urgent but he had few answers for them.

They wanted to know when they were needed back at work and how many games the new competition would have, when was Origin going to be played, and Annesley's answer was the same as it was around the rest of the game.

Nobody knows anything until ARL Commission Peter V'landys and the broadcasters, Channel 9 and Fox Sports, have reached some sort of resolution about what the revised broadcast deal looks like.

Clubs are asking the same questions as Annesley's staff.

Several Sydney clubs began talking to staff about possible resumption dates yesterday but each was the same. The conversations were light on detail.

Just who and how many are required, and when they will be needed, can't be decided until someone has some kind of idea about what the resumed competition looks like.

It is for these reasons the new broadcast negotiations will be done in record time.

There are now just 36 days until the competition is scheduled to return. V'landys met with Foxtel chief executive Patrick Delany yesterday and will meet with Channel 9 boss Hugh Marks as early as today.

Once he has the positions of each broadcaster, they will come together in the hope of finding common ground.

It is hoped there will be a resolution as early as Friday.

If so, it will be some kind of small miracle. Tens of millions of dollars are at stake and rarely are decisions made so quickly.

Already the talk is of a significant cut to this year's broadcast deal. The NRL will counter with an offer of more money and, as a trade, the potential to extend the current contract, -potentially with some of the money from the final year to be paid up front now.

Marks has already spoken of as much and it is a position the NRL is comfortable making.

The revised broadcast deal will be the first financial reset the game will undertake.

The clubs are pushing for more financial transparency, which V'landys has promised.

The salary cap will be taken to with some kind of heavy -machinery and football de-partments will be slashed -considerably.

The hope is that by the end of it, the NRL and clubs and players settle on a fair position, and a sustainable one.

It might be a great move forward for the game.

The NRL has carried the perception since the commission era began that clubs could not be trusted with their own money and so should be kept safe from themselves.

Only the NRL began carrying on with the same financial deception it had labelled the clubs with.

It began unravelling this year when the COVID-19 crisis hit and the NRL announced it had $104 million in the bank.

Clubs were told that another $25 million in receivables brought the amount to $129 million. The clubs felt nervous but confident.

I am sure that, at this time, the NRL had no idea of the -severity of what was about to hit so felt comfortable speaking with a little bravado. But then the true figures came out.

The $129 million included a $49 million deferred liability payment to be paid back by 2022. The $25 million in re-ceivables was realistically only $15 million.

So the $129 million was really $70 million.

Then it got worse.

The players asked for access to their hardship fund, given it was a full-blown crisis.

The NRL had to reveal it had not actually been banking their money. The agreement, they limply pointed out, was that the money had to be in their account at the end of the broadcast cycle.

Elsewhere, the clubs, because the NRL believed they could not be trusted, were ordered to pay money each season into a distressed clubs fund.

Again, with the clubs in some distress, the NRL did not have it either. Everyone knows the NRL pays the clubs $13 million a season, which should be more than enough with a salary cap under $10 million. But the club grant is back-ended in much the same way the NRL has been critical of clubs back-ending player contracts.

Funding in 2018 was $12.567 million, growing incrementally each year until the 2022 grant of $13.633 million. But even from that the NRL claws back a significant amount in forced payments on the clubs that -undermined the relationship.

Every year each club is asked to pay $110,000 for statistics, $178,000 for the NRL's digital department, $150,000 for a career-ending hardship fund, $188,000 for distressed club reserves and $60,000 cash after the NRL put a clause in for clubs to save money each year.

The NRL also stopped funding clubs for taking games to regional areas, making clubs not only have to pay for taking games away but obligating them to pay for the referees' equipment, too.

It also reduced each club's merchandise royalties from 40 per cent to 20 per cent, which worked out to be about an extra $60,000 in cash stripped from each club.

That is nearly three-quarters of a million dollars clubs never get to see for services, some of which they don't even want.

But the NRL is in the insult business.

So when the clubs and NRL negotiated a $1.21 million rescue package last month, to get them through May, April and June, the NRL held back $23,000 from each club, banking only $1.187 million into each club's bank accounts on April 1.

V'landys needed to intervene to force the NRL to pay its own clubs the amount it had agreed to pay.

So he comes together this week, with Delany and Marks, hoping to get done in a week what it usually takes many more months to get done.The entire game is hoping they get it done.
---
1 LATRELL MITCHELL Cast your mind back to May last year at the SCG. The Roosters flogged Wests Tigers 42-12. Mitchell (above) scored a hattrick of tries, set up two others and kicked seven goals. It was one of those perfect-10 performances, the ones only champions produce every two or three years. Latrell, for all his issues, is the game's biggest star. I cannot wait to see him run out for the Rabbitohs against his old club on Friday night.

2 THE FULLBACKS We might have lost Kangaroos greats Billy Slater and Greg Inglis in recent years but what about this lot? James Tedesco, Kalyn Ponga, Roger Tuivasa-Sheck, Tom "Turbo" Trbojevic, Ryan Papenhuyzen, Mitchell, Valentine Holmes and Charnze Nicoll-Klokstad. You can throw in Clint Gutherson, too, and Dallin Watene-Zelezniak. I defy anyone to recall any era with so much talent and so much excitement across the competition in the No. 1 jersey. Each and every one of them can turn a game in a flash.

3 CRAIG BELLAMY There's nothing quite like watching Melbourne Storm's supercoach going ballistic in the coaching box. It's the best theatre in the competition. A coach who rides every play and every tackle with the most extraordinary passion and desperation. Then you bump into him at a function and he is completely normal, calm and even laid-back. The Storm have got two huge games to restart the competition - against 2019 grand finalists the Raiders and then the Rabbitohs.

4 JUNE-JULY WITH NO ORIGIN This is such great news for the integrity of the competition. There's nothing worse than watching good teams bomb out of premiership contention around August because they've had to give up their NSW Blues and Queensland Maroons players for six weeks.

Watch the Sydney Roosters recover from their two losses now that champion fullback James Tedesco and skipper Boyd Cordner will be on deck every week. The standard of footy without 34 of the best players also falls away.

5 GUS AND SOCIAL MEDIA We're framing a market on the inevitable closure of Phil Gould's Twitter account. Grand final day is paying $66. Round eight is a $1.08 favourite, a time of year when frustrated fans traditionally start harassing the great man about his pre-season predictions, five-year plans, the abysmal mess he left behind at the Panthers etc, etc, etc. Gus however, has had more comebacks than Johnny Farnham and will be back again in 2021, hopefully unblocking your columnist.

6 WAYNE BENNETT'S FUTURE I wrote earlier in the year that "WAYNE'S PAIN" would be a backpage headline in the Tele by August. There will be so much debate and drama over the seven-time premiership-winning coach, with genuine questions about him keeping up with the modern game at 70 years of age. Bennett is under contract until the end of 2021, when assistant Jason Demetriou steps in as the Rabbitohs' head coach. But the rumour that he's returning to the Dragons next year just won't go away.

7"DAVID FIFITA The most exciting young forward in the competition since Sonny Bill Williams is off contract at the end of this season. This 113kg youngster has got the lot … the most awesome power and strength, incredible speed for a man of his size and he can step like Benji Marshall in his heyday.

He's already scored a magnificent tearaway try this year, against the North Queensland Cowboys (right), running 70m and leaving Valentine Holmes clutching at thin air.

8 REFEREE RAGE Fast forward to Thursday night, 10pm. Full-time, Broncos v Parramatta. The press conferences. What price the losing coach, Brad Arthur or Anthony Seibold, blames the one referee, the captain's challenge, the Bunker, the touch judges or new rulings around the ruck?

Considering the backlash when ARLC chairman Peter V'landys overruled just about everyone in the game to implement his changes, it will be happening all weekend.

9 ROOSTERS THREE-PEAT Can this championship outfit recover from twostraight losses in a shortened season to become the first team since Jack Gibson's Parramatta Eels (1981-83) to win threestraight titles? It's going to be a tough return to footy with matches against arch rivals the Rabbitohs and the Brisbane Broncos in the first two rounds. So much pressure will be on young halfback Kyle Flanagan, who is replacing the one and only Cooper Cronk, playing behind big boppers Jared Waerea-Hargreaves and Sio Siua Taukeiaho.

10 RADIO RATINGS It's a whole new ball game with the retirement of 2GB's The Continuous Call Team legends Ray Hadley and Bob Fulton. It's OK to say, "Don't touch the sets, don't touch dial, don't go anywhere", but you simply cannot replace a rugby league Immortal and old Hadley's 33 years of broadcasting. The ABC has been weakened, too, with the inexplicable decision to take the great Craig "Hammo" Hamilton off the team. This is the big opportunity for Triple M to rule the airwaves with "Gordie", "Kenty" and Dan Ginnane, who is now the best radio caller in the business.

11 THE WARRIORS Everyone's second-favourite team because the players, coaching staff and officials so unselfishly left their families and loved ones at home in New Zealand to ensure the NRL could start again on Thursday night.

Their non-appearance could have put in jeopardy the television deal with Channel 9 and Fox Sports.

On paper and on form from the opening two rounds, they could struggle. However, they'll be a tight outfit from living, eating and training together for weeks.

12 THE GREEN MACHINE Best side in the competition to watch because of their spectacular style of attacking football. But can they handle the pressure of expectation? That's the story. They are the favourites for the first time since the TAB started betting on rugby league. Coach Ricky Stuart (right) will get no better opportunity to win his first premiership since back in 2002 at the Sydney Roosters. This is a magnificent "Green Machine" outfit with a classy new halfback, George Williams (left), who looks to have settled in well.

13 CAMERON SMITH'S FAREWELL This will be one of the biggest and most special moments in rugby league history. The champion hooker and Immortal-in-waiting (below) has played 413 games over 19 remarkable seasons.

No interchange, no hiding on the edges and, judging by his performances in the opening two rounds, still a wonderful footballer and game manager.

No more diamond rings but deserves a memorable send-off as we salute an all-time great.

14 THE KNIGHTS Had a great start to the year under new coach Adam O'Brien but will have to battle on without the most parochial fan base in the competition. This is a side that is potentially top-four material.

Four State of Origin players in all the key positions - Dave Klemmer and Daniel Saifiti in the front row, halfback Mitchell Pearce and fullback Kalyn Ponga. At times they looked a genuine threat last year but lacked discipline as old coach Nathan Brown lost the dressingroom.

15 VALENTINE HOLMES As sad as it is to accept "Val" is no longer wearing the black, white and blue of the Cronulla Sharks, there's no doubt the Maroons and Kangaroos superstar (left) will light up the premiership.

In fact, he's one of a few players who will have benefited from COVID-19 and the extra time to get his body readjusted after a stint in the NFL. He will no doubt turn what has been a sluggish Cowboys backline into a slicker and far more dangerous unit.

16 PARRAMATTA EELS Is this finally their year? Brad Arthur lifted the blue and golds from the wooden spoon into fifth position last year. There is nothing - and I mean nothing - more exciting than watching this side in full flight at Bankwest Stadium. The wow factor of Sivo, Gutherson, Ferguson, Jennings and Blake. Mitchell Moses (right with Dylan Brown) has matured into a marquee playmaker, the type of halfback every team needs to win a title. Parramatta fans have gone 34 years since their last one.

17 "PRESSURE Poor old Dean Pay and "Mary" McGregor need wins - and they need them desperately. The debate about their futures will fill more newspaper space than any other issue as the season progresses. Both need to make the eight and play finals football to be assured of keeping their jobs. There will also be pressure on Stephen Kearney at the Warriors. This club has made the finals once in nine years and finished 13th last season. The fact the side is on the road all year could buy Kearney more time.

18 NEXT GENERATION Where do we start? Kotoni Staggs and Xavier Coates at the Brisbane Broncos. Dylan Brown at the Eels or Bronson Xerri at the Cronulla Sharks. A couple of outstanding youngsters at the Penrith Panthers - Matt Burton and the electrifying Stephen Crichton (left). Even Patrick Carrigan at the Broncos. A captain at just 22 in his second season. There are so many youngsters across the 16 clubs who are ready to become establishedstars.

19 RAY WARREN Probably the great man's last year behind the microphone. Imagine the emotion around his final call, probably in State of Origin in November. It would be even worth putting up with "Gus" for 80 minutes to hear one last call. No doubt the NRL will do something special to acknowledge the Hall of Fame broadcasting legend and our voice of league's magnificent contribution over four decades.

20 AFTERNOON GRAND FINAL C'mon Channel 9, give us one more 3pm kick-off like the good old days back at the SCG. A backyard barbecue and a party around the television. This year the grand final is scheduled for October 25. For the first time in years, it's not a long weekend. We're back to work and school the next morning.

In a recent poll, only 10 per cent of fans favoured a night-time kick-off. The NRL agrees and wants an afternoon decider, but it will be Nine's decision. Buzz Rothfield: 20 reasons why I'm excited
---
The mask is off. Following Facebook's widespread erasure of Australian pages from its platform, we now see exactly who and what we are dealing with.

Forget Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg's previously declared aims of "protecting our community from abuse and hate, defending against interference by nation states" and "making sure that time spent on Facebook is time well spent".

Replace those lofty ideals with an awareness that Facebook is a ruthless trillion-dollar entity prepared to sweep an entire nation aside if it doesn't get its way.

Invited to negotiate terms over its currently unpaid use of news content, Facebook has responded by shutting down not only news pages but also pages run by charities, government health sites, emergency services, animal rescue organisations and hospitals, among many others.

Most chillingly of all, Facebook scrubbed a domestic violence charity page run in memory of Australian Hannah Clarke and her three little children, who were doused in petrol and set alight by Ms Clarke's estranged husband exactly one year ago today.

Great timing, Facebook.

There are many parallels between Facebook's actions yesterday and China's reaction to Australian demands for an investigation into COVID-19's Wuhan origins.

China hit Australia with damaging trade barriers and tariffs. Now Facebook has hit us with indiscriminate and reckless page purges.

There is another similarity between the behaviour of China and Facebook, however, and it exposes Facebook's tactical clumsiness.

The emergence of the coronavirus and subsequent global economic disruption revealed just how dependent Western nations had become on Chinese imports and trade.

That wake-up call resonated particularly strongly in Australia, where an understanding continues to grow about the need for our nation to both find new markets and become far more self-reliant.

Likewise, Facebook's strategy reveals exactly how dependent Australians have become on a US-based social media platform that cares not at all for the welfare of Australian users.

Just as with China, Australians now know we must find other ways to connect and be informed online.

Significant opportunities now exist for multiple local developers to present their own platforms and sites. Just because Facebook is big does not mean it cannot be replaced.

"They may be changing the world," PM Scott Morrison said yesterday of monster tech companies, "but that doesn't mean they should run it." He makes a good point, and also reminds Australians of the power held by such companies.

That points to another tactical error by Facebook. The business has responded to proposed measures intended to address Facebook's excessive power by reminding everybody exactly how powerful it is.

And what a way to do it - by silencing children's charities and the like. Brilliant work, Facebook. You sure showed them who's boss.

There will be some winners out of all of this, of course.

In the absence of real news and data on Facebook, fake news, propaganda and calculated misinformation will become far more prominent.

So much for Zuckerberg's vow to make sure "time spent on Facebook is time well spent".

Instead, it will likely become a haven for conspiracy theorists and other identities currently shoved to the margins. At a time of global contagion, this is not an optimal situation. But we will emerge the better for this. Facebook may well find out that it needs our money more than we need its platform.
---
TWO moments of brilliance from Titans skipper Jamal Fogarty in the dying stages of the match propelled the Titans to a 14-10 win over the Dragons last night that all but ended the Red V's finals hopes.

The Dragons enjoyed a mountain of possession all night - they were tackled inside the Titans' 20-metre line a whopping 44 times - but all they had to show for it was a 10-4 lead heading into the final five minutes.

The Titans, who were under siege all night, finally levelled the scores in the 75th minute through Tyrone Peachey.

Dragons prop Josh Kerr appeared to have the ball covered after a Fogarty kick, but fumbled into the goalposts to present Peachey with an absolute gift of a four-pointer.

From the next set, AJ Brimson surged up the middle into the clear and found Fogarty in support - and this time there was no Josh Papalii to run him down, with the 26-year old scoring next to the posts.

It was a stirring victory from the Titans and puts the final nail in the Dragons finals chances - if Cronulla beat North Queensland on Saturday, Dean Young's men will be three wins out of the eight with four games to play.

GOODNIGHT SAINTS The Dragons may be a mathematical chance to make the finals, but it would take a miracle for them to get into the eight from here.

The Red V have nobody but themselves to blame given the amount of possession they enjoyed, with halves Adam Clune and Corey Norman failing to create any meaningful attack or build pressure through their kicking games. It's been a valiant effort from the Dragons to rebound after their horror start to the year, but to have their finals chances ended in such a fashion is a serious disappointment.

TITANIC EFFORT The Dragons led 2-0 at the break after a tight first-half, with a Zac Lomax penalty all that separated the two teams.

But the Red V had more than enough field position to put some points on the board - the Titans showed commendable spirit in defence, turning the Dragons away time and again.

A last-ditch tackle from Keegan Hipgrave on Clune after the St George Illawarra halfback danced through off a scrum and seemed certain to score was a particular highlight.

In the end, the pressure had to tell. Jacob Host finally crossed in the 47th minute after the Dragons had four consecutive sets on the Titans line, but they scored themselves through Phillip Sami moments later.

Such effort has become more common under coach Justin Holbrook, who was handed a three-year contract extension during the week.

FRIZZ STANDS TALL Given what we all know he's capable of, it's been an up and down season for Dragons backrower Tyson Frizell.

A Test and Origin regular, and one of the Dragons biggest names, Frizell signed with Newcastle for 2021 during the COVID-19 lay-off and has not always been able to find his best form since.

But as the hard-nosed backrower played like a man possessed last night, churning through 133m from 16 carries

TITANS 14 DRAGONS 10 TITANS TRIES: P SAMI 50', T PEACHEY 75', J FOGARTY 77' GOALS: J FOGARTY DRAGONS TRIES: J HOST GOALS: Z LOMAX 3
---
THE coronavirus that has become a worldwide pandemic may have been created in a "cell-culture experiment" in a laboratory, according to prominent scientists who have conducted groundbreaking research into the origins of the virus.

Flinders University -Professor Nikolai Petrovsky has completed a scientific study, currently undergoing peer review, in conjunction with Latrobe University in Victoria, which found COVID-19 was uniquely adapted for transmission to humans, far more than any other animal, including bats.

"It was like it was -designed to infect humans," he said.

Professor Petrovsky, from the College of Medicine and Public Health at Flinders University, who has spent the past 20 years developing vaccines against pandemic influenza, ebola and animal SARS, said this highly unusual finding left open the possibility that the virus leaked from a laboratory.

"The two possibilities which I think are both still open is that it was a chance transmission of a virus from an as yet unidentified animal to human. The other possibility is that it was an accidental release of the virus from a laboratory," he said. "Certainly we can't exclude the possibility that this came from a laboratory experiment rather than from an animal. They are both open possibilities." Prof Petrovsky, who is chairman and research director of Vaccine Pty Ltd, said COVID-19 had genetic elements similar to bat coronaviruses as well as other coronaviruses.

The way coronavirus enters human cells is by binding to a protein on the surface of lung cells called ACE2. The study showed the virus bound more tightly to human-ACE2 than to any of the other animals they tested.

"One of the possibilities is that an animal host was infected by two coronaviruses at the same time and COVID-19 is the progeny of that -interaction between the two viruses.

"The same process can happen in a petri-dish. If you have cells in culture and you have human cells in that culture which the viruses are infecting, then if there are two viruses in that dish, they can swap genetic information and you can accidentally or deliberately create a whole third new virus out of that system.

"In other words COVID-19 could have been created from that recombination event in an animal host or it could have occurred in a cell-culture experiment." Scientists worldwide have, to date, overwhelmingly said the virus more likely originated in a wet-market and was not created in a laboratory.

Asked why scientists have had this view, Professor Petrovsky said scientists "try not to be political" and do not want their research impacted adversely by tighter laboratory controls.

Prof Petrovsky was originally modelling the virus in January to prepare a vaccine candidate. He then turned his attention to "explore what animal species might have been -involved in the transmission to humans" to understand the origins of the virus - and had a "surprising" -result when none were well-adapted.

"We found that the COVID-19 virus was particularly well-adapted to bind to human cells and that was far superior to its ability to bind to the cells of any other animal species, which is quite unusual because typically when a virus is well-adapted to an animal and then it by chance crosses to a human, typically, you would expect it to have lower-binding to human cells than to the original host animal.

"We found the opposite so that was a big surprise," he said. The study, a collaboration between Flinders University and Latrobe University, titled "In Silico comparison of spike protein-ACE2 binding affinities across species; significance for the possible origin of SARS-CoV-2 virus", is awaiting peer-review.
---
QUEENSLAND, beautiful one day … Penrith the next.

After years spent preparing for State of Origin at venues such as XXXX Island and Clive Palmer's Coolum Resort, the 2020 Maroons are now being invited to bunk down next door to, or close enough, to NSW favourite Mark Geyer.

As part of a statewide push to have Sydney host all three Origin games this year, the Panthers Leagues Club Group has agreed to transform its hyped western Sydney facilities into Camp Maroon for all the series.

Even with Origin set to be played after the NRL Grand Final, Brisbane could still be ruled out as a host if the COVID-19 travel restriction remain in place.

Speaking with The Daily Telegraph yesterday, Panthers CEO Brian Fletcher confirmed his interest in hosting the Bananabenders, saying his organisation would do "whatever it takes" to make their complex feel like anything but enemy territory.

The move follows a joint push by both the NSW Government and NSWRL to host all three games of this year's series after Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk ruled out Brisbane as a venue for the duration of the COVID-19 health crisis.

Should the Penrith push be approved, Maroons coach Kevin Walters and his team would have access to a large complex which includes the revered Panthers Academy, which boasts two gyms, medical facilities and plunge pools.

Adjacent to that is the 200-room Mercure hotel, plus four training fields. Wonderfully for the Maroons, all facilities are also within walking distance to aqua golf, Cables Wake Park, hell even the Hooters restaurant may have reopened. So throw in a few kegs of XXXX and what isn't for them to love?

Already, NSWRL chief executive David Trodden has confirmed his interest in hosting all three Origin games in Sydney this year, with Bankwest Stadium the early venue favourite if the code remains in lockdown.

Walters has also confirmed his willingness to play the series out of enemy territory if required, with Panthers HQ now available should the QRL want to start making preparations.

"We'd love to have Queensland here," Fletcher said. "And whatever is -required, we can do it. "We've made them (NRL) aware of the facilities that are available … so they know we'd do anything to support the return of both rugby league and State of Origin football." Only last week, the Panthers Group put a proposal to the NRL innovation committee about using their facilities as a potential bubble for Queensland teams should they need to be housed here.

Trodden is a fan of transferring that idea to Origin, with Deputy Premier John Barilaro also a heavyweight backer of the Sydney -proposal.

Meanwhile, Fletcher suggested he also remained confident of the game resuming on May 28, despite Channel 9's stalling tactics.

"I'm confident we'll start on May 28," he said. "That's still a long way off and every indication with the virus is that we're getting less numbers every day which is great."So fingers crossed. It's all going in our favour for a safe return.."
---
Scourge of narcotics is user-driven Kyle Sandilands' girlfriend escapes punishment for slapping a policewoman while high on cocaine (Cop slap sparked by crisis, 15/4). What does it take for our courts to get serious?

Drugs are a scourge on our society, and almost daily we hear of big police busts happening.

It takes two to tango; without buyers there'd be no sellers. Drug suppliers are driven by those who are willing to part with good money for this rubbish.

This will continue until our courts toughen up on both suppliers and consumers. If not, why not just legalise illicit drugs and then authorities would have control and could tax these substances, freeing up police to go after more serious crime?

Jim, Sylvania

PM right to go into bat against pro-China WHO So, the World Health Organisation is giving its blessings for China to -reopen wet markets (PM blasts WHO over reopening of markets, 15/4).

Talk about a batty organisation. It is obvious all they are interested in is China.

Scientists believe live bats gave us coronavirus through a third-party animal. Both bats and third-party animals are sold live at wet markets. Yet the WHO is allowing these markets to continue on the basis that their closure would hurt the livelihood of the Chinese and impact their food security.

In February the WHO also said nations closing borders to China would do "more harm than good". Given that and the WHO's latest blessing it is obvious all they care about is 'harm' to China. They don't really care about the rest of the world. No wonder Prime Minister Scott Morrison has blasted their decision as "unfathomable".

I am no fan of US President Donald Trump, but given the apparent warmth the WHO has with China, it's no wonder the US is cutting funds to it.

The WHO wants unity and needs funding from all nations. It should therefore, consider the effect coronavirus has had on all nations and not just favour China.

Taro Munn, Watanobbi

Wet market visa bans It seems the WHO is reluctant to insist on the closure of so-called wet markets in Asia.

Given many of the diseases we are now battling apparently originate in markets like these, it would make sense when the restrictions are eased, to permanently ban all visitors to and from countries that refuse to close such markets down.

If most of the major countries around the world enforced this, I'm betting it would be a lot more effective than anything the WHO might do or not do.

Peter Thorpe, Randwick

Ensuring school safety PM Scott Morrison's call to send the kids back to school may be based on the advice of his advisers but it shouldn't go ahead without a radical implementation of basic preventive action, like that in Singapore (Back to school plea to teachers, 15/4).

All teachers should be equipped with no-touch thermometers to screen out those most at risk and this should happen twice a day.

Schools must be able to provide adequate handwashing facilities and soap in single-touch containers.

Gel sanitiser and wipes must be available in each classroom. All classroom surfaces need to be cleaned twice daily with chlorine dioxide, the steriliser proven to be active against coronavirus and used in Wuhan and airports across Asia.

Any case of infection should necessitate school closure and "fogging" with the same chlorine dioxide.

We must protect our teachers and childcare workers as well as children and their families.

Dr Colin Hughes, Midland DC, WA

Unwanted anti-vax advice With the world eagerly awaiting the discovery of a vaccine to fight COVID-19, why would anyone take the word of people whose only claim to fame is acting and surfing (Loco Lucas spreading anti-vax nonsense, 15/4).

When some of the best medical and scientific minds are feverishly researching and trialling a cure which could take many months to pass stringent protocols, what makes these people think their anti-vaccination opinion is valid.

It's the same with the person with a lamp which is purported to cure this illness.

Please don't wade into areas where you probably have no medical knowledge or background, don't stand in the way with unproven theories. There will always be naysayers but now is not the time for this message.

Maybe they should read another article in Wednesday's Telegraph about how artist Pink and her young son Jameson have suffered after contracting coronavirus (Virus-stricken star extremely sick, 15/4).

Marg Swindells, Castle Hill

Show Nine the door The NRL should say to Channel 9: There's the door don't let it hit you on the way out (Nine's NRL wipeout, 15/4).

There are more options to televise without them and, who knows, we might even get back 7pm starts to State of Origin games and 4pm Sunday afternoon grand finals.

Peter Wilcox, Blayney

When justice system fails Cardinal George Pell's wrongful conviction for serious crimes against children and his subsequent exoneration by our highest court, raises serious questions about our entire judicial system (Cardinal: My life in jail's Unit 8, 15/4).

Since his release Pell has remarked in interviews that one of his former inmates, he believes, has been wrongly convicted of murder. Pell, as an experienced and extremely well educated priest would not, I suggest, have formed this opinion lightly.

Pell had the financial backing to pursue his innocence all the way to the High Court but many others who claim their innocence do not enjoy such support.

This means they can be locked away for 10, 20, 30 years even though they are innocent.

How do we right such wrongs; what if Pell's former 'cell mate' is innocent; how many others are there in this space?

This is serious and needs to be addressed. Let us not forget Victoria's Lawyer X!

John George, Terrigal,

Briefly … As well as the Ruby Princess, we should be looking at the way we allowed plane passengers to arrive with little screening or checks for many weeks into the pandemic (It's double trouble for Ruby liner, 15/4). Must be changes for the future.

M Long, Lake Haven "" " Kudos to Scott Morrison and his tireless team working beside him. The "quiet Australians" appreciate all the hard work and long hours being put in to help us through this crisis. Go Team Australia.

Janice Russell, Malua Bay "" " Donald Trump cutting off cash to the shambolic, left-leaning World Health Organisation will scare the living daylights out of this mob (Trump cuts WHO funding - Online, 15/4).

David Ingram, Randwick "" " They say we follow whatever America does. Well, they have just stopped funding the WHO - let's hope the UN is next. I have no problem with following (Trump cuts WHO funding - Online, 15/4).

Herbert Montaine, Tugun Qld "" " Well XXXXX done, Tim Blair (Caught in the redact 15/4)! Give XXXXX Beijing some of its own XXXXX medicine. See how they XXXXX like it.

Tony XXXXX, XXXXX Coast "" " Five months to investigate how/why the Ruby Princess was allowed to dock in Sydney (It's double trouble for Ruby liner, 15/4). Five months! Unbelievable. Who is leading the investigation, Inspector Clouseau?

Geoff, NSW "" " Commonsense should be used when thinking of reopening schools (Back to school plea to teachers, 15/4). Kids and teachers at school can and will make matters worse. Best to wait for the all clear before relaxing any restrictions.

Ted, Bankstown

HAVE YOUR SAYMAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily TelegraphGPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
Panthers legends call for all NSW fans to become westies PENRITH Panthers greats have called on the people of NSW to unite behind a common cause and become proud westies for the week.

The Panthers secured their spot in the NRL grand final after they beat Souths 20-16 in a thrilling preliminary final at Sydney's ANZ Stadium on Saturday.

Melbourne Storm are facing the Panthers and Penrith legends Greg Alexander, Craig Gower and Scott Sattler want league fans to jump on-board the bandwagon of the team from Western Sydney.

"Sydney fans should become a westie for the day - get your Uggies out. Everyone loves a battler and Penrith have had plenty of battles over the years," said Sattler, Penrith's 2003 grand final hero. "It becomes state versus state doesn't it? I really have a deep respect for the Storm but I can't see many Melbourne fans being in the crowd given the borders are closed." The Storm are in their third grand final in four years, but this time, for NSW supporters, it's worse than usual - despite being based in Victoria the Storm have spent the second half of the season playing out of Queensland.

The Storm will have strong support from both states, making it even more important for the Panthers to feel the love from NSW - from the city's west to the Shire and out through the regions.

Fans Tania Jessup, 41, her daughter Patricia, 12, and partner Paul Coles, 42, were on Sunday "hungover on emotion" and ecstatic to attend what will be their first grand final.

"We were lost for words. We were a mess at the game and me and my daughter both cried. Especially given everything this year. It means a lot. We've gone through so much controversy and to pull through and come out on top is phenomenal," she said.

The Mortdale resident - who spent Sunday adorning her house in Panthers colours - said she had "a feeling" the team would make an incredible comeback this year after a horror start featuring -Tyrone May's sex tape scandal and Nathan Cleary's COVID-19 breach. "They've really stepped up and banded together," she said.

Veteran Panthers fan and Emu Plains resident Kevin Pippen, 84, who has followed the team since he attended their inaugural game against Canterbury at Belmore Oval back in 1967, said Saturday's win was "unbelievable" and he was "incredibly proud" to see the boys climb to the top.

"Having their 17th win in a row is unbelievable for any team and a record of itself. It was a real battle last night but they got there." If the Panthers do win it will be their 18th straight victory, setting a new NRL-era record.

Either way the game will be a historic event for the Craig family - it marks the first time Cathy Craig's 16 grandkids will see Penrith in a grand final.

Grandson Elijah Craig, 12, will be there at ANZ Stadium in his Panthers jersey cheering the club on. "I was so happy after last night. I knew before the game that no matter what the result was, I would be crying and I'm just glad they were happy tears." With the Queensland and Victorian borders still closed, Penrith fans - whether they are lifelong or temporary - are expected to dominate the 40,000 crowd.

"We are the only Sydney side remaining in the competition so it would be great to see 40,000 fans there supporting Penrith," said Alexander, arguably Penrith's greatest player.

"Melbourne will have some Sydney fans at the game but there won't be any travel from Victoria or Queensland. It's been 17 years since Penrith has been in a grand final so hopefully fans get out there to support the NSW team." Gower, who captained the Panthers' 2003 title winners, said non-Penrith fans should cast aside their own club passion. "Why not support the Sydney team? We should have a fair crowd out there full of Penrith fans," he said.

Penrith hopes to start grand final week on a high on Monday with Nathan Cleary the favourite to win his first Dally M Medal - the highest individual award in the NRL.

The Panthers boast a big fan base and will have heavyweight support tuning in from around the world.

Among them is surfing great Mick Fanning who was born in Penrith and became a passionate fan in 1990 when the Panthers played Canberra in the grand final.

Fanning is in California on business and tuned in at 1.30am to watch the Panthers' preliminary final win. "A lot of people are saying they haven't played big games but Cleary has won Origin series. He's so composed in those big moments," Fanning said

HOW TO BE A WESTIE Your guide to becoming a Panthers tragic Call them by one their nicknames - The Riff, Chocolate Soldiers or The Penny Panthers Point out how the Nepean River, Museum of Fire and of course Penrith Panthers Leagues Club are the real pride of the west Jump on The Daily Telegraph's website and download your Boo Bailey tribute poster.

Drop some fast facts on your mates about your favourite team, like… They're gunning for their third premiership, having won the title in 1991 and 2003.

Some of the game's greatest players have played for the Panthers, including Brad Fittler, Greg Alexander, Royce Simmons, Craig Gower and Mark Geyer Superstar fullback Nathan Cleary is the favourite to win tonight's Dally M Medal, and would join Alexander as the club's second winner of the game's major individual award.

FAMOUS FANS Pat Cummins (cricketer), James Courtney (Supercars), Mick Fanning (surfer), Kurt Fearnley (wheelchair racer), Paige Hadley (netballer), Kyah Simon (soccer)

THE TEAM SONG I know who and what I am I'm a mighty Panther man We play hard and we play fast Ain't no way we're coming last 2020 is our year That's when you hear the panthers cheer And when we go in for a try That's when you hear the panthers cry Panthers are you ready, ready?

Yes we are ready, ready Hu ha, hu ha Whoop, there it is
---
WUHAN THE Lantern Festival is the first significant feast after Chinese New Year and traditionally filled with light and laughter.

And there was plenty of lights and laughter going on in Wuhan, the origin city for the world's devastating COVID-19 pandemic.

But, while most of the rest of the world can only hold virtual festivals, with no community transmission since May 2020, Wuhan was able to hold a wonderful Lantern Festival. Residents packed into the Expo Gardens to appreciate the wonderful Chinese lanterns and enjoy traditional yuanxiao (rice balls stuffed with different fillings).
---
SO often we fall back to Johnny Sattler when the greatness of the game needs to be told.

He is part of the game's conscience, a position he never fought for or claimed but inherits through actions.

Satts long ago became a symbol of what it was and what it meant to play rugby league. That's when they spoke of character, teamwork and sacrifice.

He was tougher than he is remembered for and was a whole lot meaner, too. What remains unquestioned is when the battle was on Satts was the man teammates looked to for help to get them through. He knew he was not the most talented player but he knew he could sacrifice for them.

So when Souths played Manly in the 1970 grand final, the Sea Eagles knew they had to get Satts out of the way and broke his jaw in two places 10 minutes in, Satts asked a teammate to help him up because he didn't want to show he was hurt, and knew he had to get up and keep playing for the same reason Manly tried to take him out.

He was the leader.

He spent much of the rest of the game as a decoy runner, taking pressure off teammates who, in turn, were stealing his runs to protect him from more damage.

Some years earlier, Sattler made a more personal sacrifice when he toured with the 1967 Kangaroos. The tour opened with a win over Warrington on September 30 and ended with a third Test loss to France on January 8 - more than three months later.

He chose to go on the tour, away from family and to share a room in a hotel with other young men who were not all house trained, while he left his pregnant wife at home, because it was going to benefit the family long term.

That is sacrifice.

Players were almost always happy to go on three-month Kangaroo tours. Ashes cricketers are away for similar periods. Still, it was also a personal choice.

Terry Lamb was selected in the 1982 Kangaroos but withdrew. Lamb had a wedding date with his future wife, Kim.

Another player also pulled out of the '82 Kangaroo tour. This time he wanted to go but his wife refused to let him cancel their wedding. He stayed home, got married, and then divorced a couple of years later. He probably should have identified a problem the night the Kangaroos were read out.

Character reveals itself at different times.

When David Furner got picked in 1994 he also had a wedding he had to attend, as the groom, but in conversation with his future wife, Kelly, they understood the opportunity and what it might do for their lives, together, and Furner toured. The wedding was postponed. The only negative it made to their lives was they now say they have been married 25 years, not 26.

Today's players seem to think a little closer to home.

This week Brisbane's most senior player, Darius Boyd, said he will not relocate to Sydney if it meant getting the competition started again.

"No chance in hell I could do four months away from my family and that's something I wouldn't be OK with," Boyd told the local news.

Where Boyd got four months from is unclear. That is absolutely worst case, and so unlikely it will almost certainly not happen.

Was he trying to bring weight to his refusal to move?

North Queensland have privately questioned relocating to NSW given the circumstances like that of Michael Morgan, whose wife is due in August.

Most of the focus to resuming the competition has been getting the Warriors to Australia. They have agreed to relocate so a 16-team comp can resume. It means leaving family at home.

There are natural concerns. Chiefly, if an emergency happens and the player must return home he will be forced to endure quarantine for two weeks before being able to see his family.

That is troublesome yet the Warriors understand what is at stake. The NRL is considering bringing their families with them. They wobbled slightly earlier this season when they stated they wanted to return home rather than quarantine on the Gold Coast.

The reality of the business then visited them when they were quietly told if they did return to New Zealand, and the NRL season continued without them, they would not be paid.

They vowed to stay on another round until a week later when the whole season shut. This economic reality is still missed on some of the players, even after their own Rugby League Players Association agreed to a 72 per cent pay cut for the rest of their financial year.

ARL Commission chairman Peter V'landys has fought hard to resume the season. He has suffered attacks from various ignorants who refuse to concede the NRL is an industry employing thousands, like all those construction sites that continue to work.

Yet V'landys has pushed on for what is the greater good.

The difficulty appears now to be the Queensland clubs and that state's premier Annastacia Palaszczuk, who has closed her borders and declared any Queensland-based player returning to the state must undergo a 14-day quarantine. In other words, Queensland teams would have to relocate to NSW to make the competition work.

Then she said Origin could not be played in Queensland. And then, perhaps realising she has just dropped an election clanger, she had the temerity to say if an Origin could not be played in Queensland then the series should not be played at all.

A couple of days after Boyd's refusal Gold Coast winger Dale Copley, a players' union rep, said the Queensland teams were considering a demand similar to the Warriors.

If they relocate, their families must also go with them.

Just as the season looks on track to resume, the players are making demands that could unravel it all.

This is the time for RLPA chief executive Clint Newton to be the leader. Since the game went into shutdown Newton has been the highly visible boss of the players union. He has done a good job of managing up. Earlier this month Newton confirmed the players had managed to "get a seat at the table" in future salary cap discussions.

This week he said the RLPA wanted "a seat at the table" in future broadcast negotiations, which they received.

Yet it is irrelevant if he can't keep the players united underneath him and present them to the resumption of the season. If the sacrifice is too big for Boyd, or Morgan, they have every right to remain home. But it should not be allowed to be considered as a potential reason to prevent the season resuming.

It is impossible to resume under ideal circumstances. The world simply isn't ready for it yet. Sacrifices have to be made. The incentive for the players, besides winning a premiership, is a resumption of salary. They are not unique in this. Sports around the world are considering similar strategies, or have had to find ways to continue.

Pakistan has not played a home Test since Sri Lanka was attacked by terrorists in Lahore in 2009. That is their price to play Test cricket.

The Autumn Carnival ends with two Group 1 races at Randwick today, the Champagne Stakes (1600m) and the All Aged Stakes (1400m), worth several hundred thousand dollars to the winner.

Hugh Bowman rides the favourite, King's Legacy, in the Champagne and another strong chance, Bivouac, in the All Aged. For weeks Bowman has lived in a little one-bedroom apartment across the road from Randwick racecourse, isolating himself.

He knows better than most the Autumn Carnival is money time for jockeys. Bowman did not want to risk catching COVID-19 and taking it home to his family or, more likely, catching it at home and being barred from the track.

He understands the sacrifice, like Johnny Sattler.

In '67 Sattler returned from a three-month Kangaroo tour to meet his new daughter, then five weeks old.

SHORT SHOTS JUST last Friday, Richard Freedman appeared on Fox League Live talking about some of the champion racehorses he and his brothers have trained over the years, when the conversation drifted onto other champions of the turf.

Might And Power was always a champion and Yvonne Sampson spoke fondly of heading to Living Legends last year to visit the old champ, who was a favourite for both of us. She even sent me a photo of her feeding him carrots at the time.

It was unbelievable, then, to wake 48 hours later and learn he had succumbed to a bout of colic. The sorrow from fans that followed proved romance still exists at the track.

So it is hoped that as they remain racing through the Autumn Carnival, which ends today at Randwick, the fact racing has been the only live sport on TV will give it an audience that will deliver more fans in the future.

The only pity is racing missed a designated star, like last year when Winx thrilled us all.

As for the rest of our television viewing, there are only so many 30 For 30 repeats anyone can watch.The early winners for me are the re-runs of old fights and the darts.
---
FALLEN Broncos coach Anthony Seibold is ramping up his cyber-bullying probe - the names of three NRL-related people all based in Sydney have been supplied to the NRL integrity unit.

Seibold's legal team has sent a dossier to the NRL after the ex-Broncos coach hired a team of European cybersecurity experts to investigate a slew of defamatory attacks on him on social-media platforms.

That dossier includes three names with links to the NRL. Seibold was given a long list of names, some members of the public he has never heard of, but the NRL-related figures were individuals he recognised.

It means if Seibold chooses to forge ahead with his case, which he plans to do, then he will have to ask NSW police to join Queensland police in investigating the slurs. It is understood an ongoing legal battle for Seibold will cost him in excess of $50,000, money he is prepared to outlay to bring change to social-media legislation in Australia and ensure protection on social-media platforms.

Seibold does not plan to publicly name and shame the NRL-related names he recognises, but he wants to pursue the matter privately through the NRL integrity unit and the legal system. But if the matter ends up in the courts, the names of Seibold's attackers are certain to be released.

" " " A PLANNED Test between New Zealand and Tonga has been scrapped. There was talk of a three-Test series during Origin at the end of the year but because of the uncertainty surrounding COVID-19, there will be no international league played in Australia this year.

" " " BENJI Marshall won't be reunited with younger brother Jeremy at the Bulldogs. The club has ruled out making a play for the 35-year-old. Marshall wants to play on next year.

" " " THE sporting community has rallied to support the Red Cross Beirut Appeal following the devastating explosion last month. Robbie Farah, Mitch Moses, Josh Mansour, Billy Dib, Andrew Nabbout, Tarek Elrich, Moudi Najjar plus The Telegraph's Fatima Kdouh have launched a campaign calling for help. To donate: redcross.org.au/beirut.
---
Labor on outer with workers IT appears that ex-Labor front bencher Joel Fitzgibbon has caused a bit of a stink in the Labor Party as they try to work out what they stand for (Labor to try to dig itself out of a hole, 17/11).

Their climate wish list is certainly at odds with their traditional origins, and many of their voters now question the veracity of the party.

It might serve Labor well if they tap Anthony Albanese on the shoulder and pass the remit onto someone like Joel Fitzgibbon, who can lead them in a more beneficial direction.

Because at present, having a Greens Party and a quasi Greens Party just doesn't cut the mustard.

Peter Cattlin, Freshwater

If workers who vote Labor feel they are being ignored or forgotten by the party, all they have to do is stop paying their union fees (Labor to try to dig itself out of a hole, 17/11) - that would be certain to get their attention.

Stop an income stream at your peril.

Barry Laurie, Tweed Heads

Payback for botched payment scheme The word "fiasco" has typically followed "Robodebt", and with good reason (Victims of robodebt win $1.2b in compo, 17/11.) For many, the scheme's attempt to ensure recipients of Centrelink benefits were not over-receiving payments sounds only reasonable.  But this was never a good policy and was poorly implemented as the article implies, calling it a "botched scheme". The government's decision to walk away from defending the scheme against a class action is because they know what everyone else knows - the scheme was basically unlawful.  "Overpayments" the government recovered based on a flawed income-averaging model, were "not lawful debts", according to the Department of Social Services. The only real question is: why did the government wait so long before deciding to settle the class action.

Dr Jack Dikian, Mosman

Taxpayers slugged again There's a double whammy in the Robodebt class action settlement. The feds or - or, more correctly, taxpayers - are coughing up $1.2 billion to pay back and compensate about 400,000 Australians illegally stung with welfare debts (Victims of robodebt win $1.2b in compo, 17/11).

Yet no ministers, or their advisers, have been held to account - especially as Robodebt caused untold stress and trauma for these hapless victims and their families. Not happy, Jan.

Steve Ngeow, Chatswood

Distress signal Just to clarify, the people on welfare who received benefits they were not entitled to sued because they didn't want to give it back, and will now be paid extra as compensation for their emotional distress (Victims of robodebt win $1.2b in compo, 17/11).  Over $1.2bn to people already on taxpayer money and many in public housing. It's amazing how some always know how to lawyer-up. We reap what we sow.

Kim Baker, Engadine

Sitting on Defence I can understand the veteran's mother being concerned about the appointment of a former Defence worker to the new position of National Commissioner for Defence and Veteran Suicide (Mum questions impartiality, 17/11).

I also have reservations about the appointment. To me this appointment is little more than a backside-covering and public relations exercise designed to make it look like something is being done on veterans' suicides but also to put a buffer between the government and the problem.

It seems every time we have a serious problem these days, the solution is to appoint a commissioner, along with a shed full of hangers-on, called staff. Very costly and to what effect?

John George, Terrigal

Border force The current situation where the premiers can justify imposing lockdowns and restrictions by merely saying they are acting on the advice of their chief health officers is not good enough and the public is entitled to know "exactly" why they are being imposed (NSW still open as SA fights outbreak, 17/11). Following the new cluster in South Australia, the immediate response by some premiers was to close their borders.

They did not provide any other justification for their decisions other than they were acting on the advice of health experts. Really?

The following is an extract from the World Health Organisation regarding their position on lockdowns: "Large-scale physical distancing measures and movement restrictions, often referred to as 'lockdowns', can slow COVID-19 transmission by limiting contact between people. However, these measures can have a profound negative impact on individuals, communities and societies by bringing social and economic life to a near stop." I'm not a health expert. However, from what I have read regarding the advice on border closures and lockdowns, supported by WHO's position, these measures should only be imposed as a last resort.

Bernard Thompson, Cowra

House sitting It was reported this week that a Vaucluse mansion sold at auction for more than $24 million, reported to be $10 million over the reserve price. The buyers were reportedly two young Chinese, aged 26 and 29.

These two young people also own a $10 million apartment atop the Swiss Hotel in the CBD.

I am somewhat confused because I was under the impression that high-priced real estate was under federal government control when it came to purchases made by overseas buyers. Particularly Chinese buyers.

There is a government spat over the banning of many of Australian exports by the Chinese Communist Party. Why are overseas buyers allowed to make these sorts of purchases?

David Griffiths, Wellington

Chewy on your boot I have made a promise to myself never to buy an Allen's (Nestle) product again (Redskins ripped as Chicos are now cheeky, 17/11). Why?  Well, apart from standing on a street corner and shouting the odds it is the only way I have of protesting about this ridiculous rebranding of products simply because the name may offend about one in every million or so people.  What kind of mindset Chris O'Donnell, Nestle general manager, confectionary, has in this regard is hard to imagine. Redskins, Chicos, Coon Cheese? Australians grew up with these names. Civil libertarians have changed the world so that now kids run wild in school (School under siege, 14/11) and a prison sentence is more like a home from home thanks to the Prisoners Action Groups. I'm an ex-Pommie and I now declare the word Pom to be offensive and I want something done about it!

Alex Hosking, Gold Coast

Briefly … At the completion of the State of Origin I plan to then use the Suncorp Stadium as a venue where all families and friends of those who have been denied access to the state to attend births, terminal illness and deaths can come together knowing they are protected from the dreaded virus. We have so much to be thankful for in the knowledge that Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk and her ever-present state health adviser can consecrate this facility - walking on water is their next feat.

Herbert Montaine, Tugun, Qld

* * * Despite all of their country's flaws, Americans still have the right to freely choose their president - unlike the poor Chinese community who just have to accept decisions from Communist Party leaders or pay a price which will never end in their favour.

Brad Probert, Woodlands

* * * The Nestle company has delivered on its promise to give new "woke" names to the popular Allen's lollies Redskins and Chicos after they were deemed offensive and inappropriate (Redskins ripped as Chicos are now cheeky, 17/11). I hope all of the hard-line change merchants are happy now after getting into quite a tizzy earlier in the year.

Peter Penglis, Kambah

HAVE YOUR SAYMAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
LIVE venues will soon host crowds at 75 per cent capacity in states recording no locally acquired COVID-19 cases for a fortnight.

The federal government yesterday unveiled its live performance road map, outlining plans for what it calls a "COVID normal" in states that bring the virus under control.

The roadmap has been agreed to by National Cabinet and provides a three-step outline for how the sector can operate in a COVID-safe way.

Indoor and outdoor seated events will be able to reach three-quarters capacity but will remain ticketed only. The eased restrictions do not apply to some larger events, with outdoor festivals subject to strict controls and approvals.

The eased restrictions will come into effect in states that have gone 14 days without a locally acquired coronavirus case.

But with events in Queensland, including Wednesday's State of Origin decider, already hosting full capacities, Arts Minister Paul Fletcher rejected claims the roadmap should have been released earlier. He said the news was welcome relief for a sector hard hit by coronavirus. The announcement came alongside confirmation $60m of the government's arts rescue package had begun to flow immediately. Grants of between $50,000 and $2m had been allocated to 115 projects
---
AN 81-year-old Ruby Princess passenger who contracted COVID-19 on board the cruise ship yesterday became the 47th person to die in NSW from the disease.

The woman's death brings the toll from the vessel to 22.

Six new cases were recorded across the state yesterday from 8117 tests. Among the new cases were two staff members of Newmarch House, who contracted the virus as close contacts of a nurse who also caught the disease. Neither worked while infectious, NSW Health said.

An additional two people were confirmed to have the virus after initial tests were -inconclusive.

Both were in isolation, and had been treated as if they had the disease, Chief Health Officer Kerry Chant said.

The origin of one case was still under investigation yesterday, and one case was confirmed in a returning traveller.Yesterday the state government announced a boost to the capacity of the state's ICU capacity, after more than 1500 nurses were given a "refresher course" in intensive care.
---
THE Seven Network's stoush with Cricket Australia could have major ramifications for the NRL as the broadcaster prepares to launch a stunning bid to steal State of Origin - and potentially the premiership - from bitter rival the Nine Network.

Seven has threatened to walk away from its deal with Cricket Australia, having labelled the organisation a "train wreck" and branded its administration as "stumbling, bumbling" and "incompetent".

If Seven does tear up its contract, it would free up about $100 million a year. That would leave Seven with the financial artillery to make a charge at rugby league's commercial broadcasting rights, which are up for grabs from 2023.

While the NRL recently extended its deal with Foxtel until the end of 2027, the Nine Network dug in its heels, leaving the commercial rights vulnerable to a potential bid from Seven or Ten.

Sources close to Seven confirmed the network was already sizing up an offer for Origin and that could extend to the premiership, depending on its financial situation in the new year.

It is understood Seven powerbrokers have also had informal talks with Foxtel over a sharing arrangement that could result in Origin being simulcast from 2023, when the NRL's deal with the Nine Network is due to expire.

Seven is in the process of selling assets to strengthen its bottom line and it is understood it has urged the ARL Commission to wait until the new year to begin talks with commercial broadcasters.

The commission and the NRL are in no rush. They occupy a position of strength thanks to their deal with Foxtel, the five-year extension alone worth around $1 billion.

With that contract in their back pocket, they can take their time and pit the commercial broadcasters against each other.

Nine is believed to be keen to retain rugby league, but chief executive Hugh Marks (pictured) is a shrewd operator and will want to pay as little as possible to keep the code.

Ratings have been sluggish on Nine this year, although that can in part be explained away by the form of the Brisbane Broncos.

The game's flagship club has been a constant on Nine, a decision that was made during the COVID-19 break when the broadcasters were given more say over the scheduling of matches.

At the time, the Broncos were unbeaten through two games. When rugby league returned from the COVID-19 break, Nine's ratings reached record numbers.

Since then, they have stagnated largely because of the form of the Broncos, who have lost 13 out of 14 games and suffered a series of shellackings. - THE AUSTRALIAN
---
LATRELL Mitchell is quickly becoming the fullback you thought he couldn't be. Or maybe it was your mate. Certainly, you knew someone who refused to believe, right?

We all did. But six rounds into the weirdest NRL season on record and Mitchell isn't only growing nicely into the South Sydney No. 1 jersey, but finding that other commodity so many thought impossible for him - consistency.

Against the Warriors last night, this most hyped of Roosters imports orchestrated two tries, was strong positionally, even saved a try on Warriors winger Dave Fusitu'a - albeit with a tackle that looked a tad, err, high.

And on that one, Mitchell was lucky not to be penalised.

May still be. Regardless, no onfield action was taken by referee Matt Cecchin, despite replays appearing to show Mitchell whack Fusitu'a around the melon as he stepped infield off his right foot at the try line. In his two try assists, the Bunnies No. 1 showed softer hands than those toilet rolls you fought over in the supermarket.

But on that try-line hit? Not so much.

Indeed, given Fusitu'a dropped to the ground, then dropped the ball, it may yet draw interest from the match review panel.

Still, it was a strong night for Mitchell. That most contentious of Kangaroos who, despite who knows how many headlines since the 2019 grand final, seems to have silenced those who thought him too heavy, too uninterested or simply not a No. 1.

Better, the strong performance follows on from consecutive strong showings against Melbourne and Gold Coast.

Last night's win, in front of 436 fans at Bankwest Stadium, is also the first time this season coach Wayne Bennett's side have secured consecutive wins.

MURRAY IN THE MIDDLE Cameron Murray is back in the middle and all is right with the world. Or certainly, getting better.

In his second game back from a brief fling on the Bunnies edges, the NSW Origin incumbent set up one try for Adam Reynolds and almost another for Braidon Burns with moments of skill.

He churned through 36 tackles, too. Big night also for Souths No. 6 Cody Walker, who scored one try, grubbered for another, busted tackles and all while also spending 10 minutes in the sin bin for a professional foul.

Elsewhere, Reynolds was strong, winger Alex Johnston scored a double, centre Campbell Graham made seven tackle busts and Tom Burgess ran for 164m.

The news, however, was not so good for prop Tom Amone, who left the field with what appeared to be a serious knee injury.

WARRIORS WOES Geez, the Warriors made some clangers. Like in the first half when, with the scores locked 6-all, the Aucklanders butchered two tries in as many sets.

Worse, the second was an intercept to Bunnies winger Dane Gagai, who ran 90m, was tackled, earned a penalty - which saw Kodi Nikorima binned - and then, Souths try.

Truly, within the space of 60 seconds the Warriors not only cost themselves a 12-point swing but a playmaker.

Which, of course, is tough to see. Especially given how much this mob is giving up to keep the NRL alive.

HONOURABLE MENTION With COVID-19 restrictions, there are plenty of ways to go crazy this weekend. But, please, take the time to buy a beanie.

RABBITOHS 40 WARRIORS 12 SOUTH SYDNEY TRIES:A JOHNSTON 2, C WALKER, D COOK, B BURNS, C GRAHAM, A REYNOLDS GOALS: A REYNOLDS 6 NEW ZEALAND TRIES: D FUSITUA, A PAASI GOALS: K NIKORIMA 2
---
BUNNINGS customers are urged to be on alert for symptoms after a staff member at a Campbelltown store tested positive to COVID-19.

The employee reportedly wore a mask and practised social distancing on three shifts this week at Bunnings on the corner of Kellicar Rd and Bugden Place.

NSW Health is asking any customers who visited the store to monitor for symptoms and if they do become even slightly unwell to self-isolate and get tested.

The employee worked on August 4 from 11am-7pm, August 5 from 8am-4pm and August 6 from 1pm-3pm.

Staff members who came into contact with the employee have been identified and are self-isolating.

Bunnings said in a statement last night the employee "is a close contact of a family member who tested positive and was self-isolating at home when they received the positive result.

Masks have been compulsory for staff at southwest Sydney stores including Campbelltown since July 25, Bunnings said, and for all of NSW staff since August 3.

A schoolgirl from Our Lady of Mercy College has also tested positive, prompting the school to close for a deep clean of the campus.

NSW Health is currently conducting contact tracing with the school's assistance. Yesterday saw the reopening of one of Sydney's hippest markets but social distancing and masks weren't on th-e menu.

"The stalls were still pretty close together and there were a lot of people hanging around; it's hardly the sort of get-in-and-out style shopping experience that you see at the supermarkets," one visitor to the markets said.

"There were some stallholders without masks." A female shopper said: "I'd say about half the people are wearing masks and social distancing seemed OK." On its website Carriageworks said it was limiting numbers to 350 people as well as banning both BYO coffee cups and tastings.

On Saturday the state recorded its lowest COVID-19 statistics in over two weeks, with nine infections in the 24 hours to 8pm on Friday.

It's the first time NSW cases have dipped below double figures since July 24, when seven were -recorded.

One of the new cases is a student of Tangara School for Girls in Cherrybrook in Sydney's northwest, which has also been closed for cleaning and tracing.

The origin of that and two other infections remain a mystery to NSW Health. Australian Medical Association NSW president Dr Danielle McMullen said she was "more concerned now than I have been at any other time during this pandemic because we do have cases of community transmission and we don't know where all of them are coming from".
---
For any negotiations to be successful, a certain amount of trust must be held between the -involved parties. This is one reason why discussions -between Australia and China are so fraught. The Chinese government argues from such an absurd position that it verges on comedy.

China's Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying provided a perfect example of Chinese negotiation lunacy during a press conference this week.

"China always speaks out loud and clear and upholds justice when it comes to violations of human conscience and international fairness and justice," Hua insisted.

This is ridiculous. It is a matter of record that China conceals from its own citizens the details of atrocities such as the massacre in Tiananmen Square.

Likewise, the number of prisoners executed by China every year is a state secret.

In that light, China's opportunistic attacks on Australia over war crimes violations -appear to be no more than an -attempted distraction.

Hua called on media to "not only zoom in their lenses on human rights issues in China", but to also examine "human rights violations committed in some western countries".

No violations in western countries come anywhere near the levels of abuse that are -officially sanctioned by China's ruling communist dictatorship.

The world knows this. The Chinese dictatorship knows this. But the Chinese people, shielded by state media, do not.

Incredibly, following China's oppression of its minority Muslim Uyghur population, Hua claimed "China enjoys trad-itional friendship with the Islamic world" and is "protecting the rights of Muslim believers".

Unfortunately, no Uyghurs were available for comment due to them being held in "voluntary education and training camps".

"China has been open, transparent and responsible in origin tracing," Hua continued, add-ressing China's handling of the coronavirus crisis.

"We are among the first countries to co-operate with the World Health Organisation." That co-operation was closer to a conspiracy. The WHO's -initial response to COVID-19 was to praise Beijing, the source of significant WHO funding. The Chinese dictatorship makes it very difficult to -advance negotiations. Sadly, that may long be the case.
---
China's president backs review into coronavirus

CHINESE President Xi Jinping last night backed a comprehensive international review of the COVID-19 pandemic in a sensational diplomatic win for Australia.

The powerful leader told the World Health Assembly his country supported the idea, but only after the pandemic is "brought under control". The Morrison Government's push for an independent inquiry into the pandemic had been gaining momentum with 116 countries signed on to co-sponsor a draft resolution put forward by the European Union that included a motion calling for the review.

In an address to the virtual session of 194 countries, Mr Xi defended China's record on sharing information with the WHO, saying his nation had "done everything in our power to support and assist countries in need." He pledged $2 billion in funds over two years to help the global COVID-19 fight and proposed continued "research into source and transmission routes of the virus ... led by WHO and conducted in (an) objective and impartial manner".

"This may not be the last time a major health emergency comes knocking at our door," he said. "China supports the idea of a comprehensive review … after it is brought under control." Mr Xi said the virus "caught the world by surprise" and "I mourn for every life lost and express condolence for the bereaved families", adding: "The disease does not respect borders." "In China, after making painstaking efforts and enormous sacrifice, we have turned the tide on the virus and protected the life and health of our people." UN secretary general Antonio Guterres opened the event, saying "a microscopic virus has brought us to our knees." "When we have finally turned the page on this pandemic … there must be a time to look back," he said.

"Now is not that time, now is the time for the international community to work in solidarity.

"Either we get through this pandemic together or we fail." After helping to secure 116 countries to co-sponsor the draft resolution calling for the independent review and examination of the origins of COVID-19, the Morrison Government has renewed its push to beef-up the powers of the World Health Organisation. Health Minister Greg Hunt was expected to speak to the World Health Assembly overnight in favour of the draft resolution proposed by the European Union and highlight the need to bolster the power of officials to investigate new diseases.

"We need to learn the lessons from this pandemic and ensure we have the strongest possible global health architecture, with an enhanced ability to prevent and respond to future outbreaks," he was expected to say.

"This could include an examination of whether the WHO's mandate and powers, including around inspection, need to be strengthened to ensure WHO members have timely access to critical data." China denied WHO officials entry into Wuhan for almost a month after the first case of COVID-19 in December. It has remained reluctant to release detailed case data, but may now do so.
---
HOW SEVERAL NRL STARS HAVE REBOUNDED FROM INCIDENTS THEY WOULD RATHER FORGET TO BE ONE GAME AWAY FROM THE GAME'S BIG DANCE.

CODY Walker was in the thick of things a fortnight ago, just where he likes to be, when the sledge was fired.

South Sydney's No.6 was eyeballing, shoving, even pressing his forehead right into that of Newcastle rival Mitchell Pearce before, seemingly, suggesting the pair go further again, ey?

"You'll do it when I'm not looking," Pearcey joked in reply, before going louder again. "You'll do it when I'm not looking." Which you get, right?

The cackling crack, undoubtedly, was a direct reference to Walker's now infamous karate kick which - delivered during a Casino street fight last December - was filmed, extorted badly, sent viral and eventually investigated by NSW Police.

Which earlier this year, you may recall, caused some drama for the Bunnies livewire.

But now? Um, no.

Sure, he may still cop the lighthearted dig occasionally.

But over the past few months, Walker has not simply overcome said drama, but played himself up among the biggest stories - and superstars - of the 2020 NRL season.

Which isn't to dub this weekend "Redemption" Round.

Indeed, there is no more misused phrase in the rugby league vernacular. But undoubtedly, like Walker, there are a handful of players across all four remaining clubs who over the past 12 months have survived, even bounced back from all sorts of dramas to now sit within 80 minutes of an NRL grand final.

As for their respective crimes?

Make what you want of them.

Plenty do.

But certainly, all are on the cusp of going from rugby league's outhouse to penthouse.

CODY WALKER South Sydney Rabbitohs Street fight Walker's run to, and through, the NRL finals has been so strong Andrew Johns likens it to that of Parramatta prodigy Jarryd Hayne in '09.

Which is some claim.

Same deal NSW Origin coach Brad Fittler revealing the Indigenous All Star is now his leading candidate for the Blues' No.6 jersey - in the box seat, ahead of Luke Keary - after being hooked, then punted after a horror debut last year.

Indeed, so outstanding has Walker been over the back half of the year, it's unthinkable to believe that as recently as May he was embroiled in a NSW Police investigation over his involvement in a country NSW street fight.

Walker later revealed he had been mourning the loss of a cousin before the incident occurred.

NATHAN CLEARY Penrith Panthers TikTok controversy Okay, so find me a 20-something bloke anywhere who wouldn't open the door if a bevy of blondes came knockin'?

But after breaking NRL COVID-19 bubble restrictions in April with that TikTok dance, and then lying about it to League HQ, Cleary has since found the best form of his young career.

Despite calls to out the Panthers No.7 for the year, Cleary eventually missed two games, outlayed $30K and then went about leading his team to the NRL minor premiership.

Better, he is now short-priced favourite to secure the Dally M Medal.

NELSON ASOFA-SOLOMONA Melbourne Storm Bar fight Remember the big unit's Bali bar fight last October?

Of course you do.

His moment of viral madness was enough for the Melbourne prop to eventually be fined $15,000 and suspended for three Tests.

Yet in reality?

Somebody should have awarded him a shiny gold belt.

Apart from showing a set of fists as heavy as they were hectic, Asofa-Solomona also ignited said chaos only after teammate Suliasi Vunivalu was king hit.

Regardless, the 115kg Stormer remains a key component of the Melbourne pack.

HUDSON YOUNG Canberra Raiders Eye-gouging Few blokes ever get suspended for eye-gouging. Fewer still, go twice. Yet after a 2019 crime spree more suited to, say, Reg Reagan, the young Raider with rugby league's most unfortunate signature is finally fulfilling his potential.

Against the Roosters last week, Young was outstanding.

And the Raiders backrower has revealed how regular sessions with a sports psychologist are helping him control an aggressive streak that resulted in suspensions totally 13 weeks last year.

Among the Raiders' best against the reigning premiers, Young now looms as a genuine threat against Melbourne on Friday night.

TYRONE MAY Penrith Panthers Sex tapes After sitting out the 2019 season for his involvement in a sex tape scandal, 24-year-old May has this year become a key component of the NRL minor premiers.

Playing off the bench as a utility, May can fill a variety of spots for coach Ivan Cleary, who has remained one of his biggest supporters both during and after the ordeal. May's ability to fill a variety of positions has also freed up Isaah Yeo to play regularly at No.13, where he has starred for the Panthers this year.
---
Veterans still in the firing line THE Morrison Government's treatment of our war veterans is more than disgusting (The real 'brutal' truth - Alan Jones, 11/2). What a coward's way to sneakily change the Meritorious Unit Citation's status to suit one's own agenda, then to treat them all as criminals is beyond comprehension.

 I have voted Liberal most of my life, but no more will I vote for the LINOs (Liberals In Name Only).

Glenn O'Sullivan, Kanwal

Thank you Alan Jones (The real 'brutal' truth, 11/2), "if the government cares nothing for our veterans, why should the voter care for the government?" That's a perfect question, and not only concerning veterans.

 The government is far too happy to kowtow to the noisy, activist Left while throwing the innocent majority under the bus. Amazing how the top brass in the army escape scrutiny. Equally amazing is that I never saw any of the top brass in the banking inquiry held to account.

 One rule for the upper echelon and activists, another rule for the average voter who put you in office.

Robyn Moase, Ettalong

Clayton's call from WHO investigation We now know from the WHO investigation into the COVID-19 virus that they have found nothing (Coronavirus cover-up, 11/2).

 Apparently it doesn't come from Wuhan wet markets or from laboratory leaks but the scientific experts think that it could be from bats or from some frozen foods imported from other countries ... seriously!

 It's just another cover-up from a country that thrives on blaming everyone except themselves and a WHO that is as useless as it gets.

 This was a Clayton's investigation from the start.

Nev, Menai

Saving face The report by the World Health Organisation on the origins of COVID-19 does little for the credibility or reputation of the scientists involved or the institution itself (Coronavirus cover-up, 11/2).

 It is undeniable that this report was concluded in haste, shallow and vague enough to save face for the Chinese Government.

 This brings the question as to what extent have segments of the scientific community compromised their science and reputation?

 The general public is asked to "trust the science" and believe in the scientists - WHO's Clayton's Wuhan report does nothing to help us trust or believe.

Bruce Collison, Banks, ACT

Flights of fancy The WHO investigation into the Chinese Wuhan virus was unnecessary (Coronavirus cover-up, 11/2). All one has to be reminded of was the fact that the Chinese Government banned all domestic airline flights from Wuhan to any other city in China.

 But they allowed international flights to proceed as normal. Charles Gates, Hornsby

A work in progress Federal Labor leader Anthony Albanese's labour reforms are excellent and will cost business a large amount of money, but the long-term trend in our country has been towards more insecure casual work which undermines living standards, is disruptive to people and should be corrected (The gig is up for job proposal, 11/2).

 Business understandably seeks flexibility and efficiency, but CEOs have relatively secure and consistent jobs, as do politicians, public servants and professionals.  It's time exploitation of all types ended.

Rod Matthews, Fairfield, Vic

Age-old problem Given the current debate regarding the JobSeeker allowance, there is one issue that no-one talks about - the older JobSeeker.

 The bottom line is, if you are older (above 60), you have no chance of getting sustainable employment. No one wants you.  This hasn't improved with the Government incentives for employers to hire under 35s. You can't get a job and can't get the pension until you are 67.5 years old.

 The federal Government needs to introduce a JobSeeker supplement payment of around $300 per fortnight for the over 60s, who have paid tax all their lives, had little access to superannuation and are the ignored community.

Grant Errington, Ashfield

Elements of truth If Dan "the Man" Andrew believes he has the Gold Standard of controlling COVID, our Glad must have Platinum Plus (Virus hits Vic hubris on hotels, 10/2).

 I was prepared to give him the benefit of the doubt with his handling of the hard lockdown because of the numbers of deaths and I felt very sorry for our southern neighbours.

 But now I am questioning him when he spruiks the Gold Standard in controlling his State. He has one confirmed case, locks down his State for one day and then opens up so a tennis tournament can go ahead.  Players from around the world are allowed into his State but he will not up his numbers to Australians wanting to come home.

 Now his COVID numbers are rising. Yep Dan "the Man" Andrews you have the Gold Standard of stupidity, or is it just electioneering.

Barbara Thompson, Newington

Chapter and verse Gary Halloran (Letters, 11/2) made the assertion that the HSC is a mechanism for grading a student's ability in "understanding the texts studied throughout the course", specifically in the subject of English.  I contend that the English HSC exam is there to assess not only what the student understands from Year 11 and Year 12 texts but to display their understanding of the English language, which they should have been learning for some 13 years.

 If a student sits for a HSC Maths exam but has no idea about long division, fractions, or any of the basic arithmetic methodology, then higher level mathematics might prove to be beyond them.

 The HSC should be an affirmation of a holistic education which would set the student up for the future.

John Dobija, Seaham

Majority rules Great article (It's not just McGuire, 11/2) from Andrew Bolt exposing the hypocrisy of the woke Left. Jacqui Lambie asks the same question: "Why do we keep bending over for the minority?"  The answer is that our politicians and business leaders are weak and lack the conviction to take on the minority Left, so it was a pleasing surprise to see Greg Hunt call out ABC 'journalist' Michael Rowland for his obvious left-leaning political bias. A tip for politicians wanting to succeed: there are many more votes to be had by siding with the majority. Silence and sitting on the fence is just not good enough.

Mitchell Beston, Woy Woy

Masking the issue I travel on public transport every day and am amazed at the number of people not wearing masks or not wearing them correctly.

 Most schoolchildren over 12 don't wear masks on public transport. I have also noticed many staff in cafes and takeaways who are serving customers and not wearing masks.  When is the government going to come down hard on these people and start fining them? It would be interesting to know how many fines have been issued to people for not wearing masks.

Stephen Totham, Wentworthville

Briefly ...

The year of the Ox? Maybe for China it should be the year of the Oxymoron. David Lambert, Berry

* * * I have a solution to the graffiti problem. If someone is caught doing graffiti the punishment should be a tattoo of an opponent's tag on the forehead.

John Stuart, St Fillans

* * * Wot. Tork about the pot corling the kettal blak Tony Wilkinson (Briefly, 11/2). Its consentrayt not consentrait. Lurn the kwenes Inglisch.

Glenn Balcombe, Oatlands

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
CHINA may have fudged its COVID-19 death figures by tens of thousands, according to figures which tracked crematory operations in Wuhan earlier this year.

A study published on the preprint server medRxiv claims the official Chinese statistics on COVID-19 cases and the country's mortality may not be accurate.

The study looked at investigative media reports of crematory operations in Wuhan - the origin and -epicentre of the coronavirus pandemic.

"The estimates of cumulative deaths, based on both -funeral urns distribution and continuous full capacity operation of cremation services up to March 23 give results around 36,000 - more than 10 times of the official death toll of 2524," states the report.  "Our study indicates a significant under-reporting in Chinese official data on the COVID-19 epidemic in Wuhan.

"The magnitude of discrepancy between our estimates based on cremation related data and Chinese -official figures in early February - the critical time for -response to the COVID-19 pandemic - suggests the need to re-evaluate official statistics from China and -consider all available and reasonable data sources for a better understanding of the COVID-19 pandemic." It comes as an antibody study by the Chinese Centre for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) suggested nearly half a million residents in Wuhan may have been -infected with COVID-19 - 10 times the official number.
---
THE COVID FILES SNUBBED MAGNATE DEFENDS CHINA STANCE

THE controversy over Andrew-- Forrest's China connections- escalated yesterday when a cancer funding ann-ouncement with the Health Minister was cancelled amid disturbing revelations about the Chinese genomic company which supplied- COVID-19 test kits to the billionaire's charity.

Mr Forrest and Health Minister Greg Hunt were due to visit Melbourne's Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, to announce a $67 million package for kids with cancer.

But the event was called off at late notice and a joint -statement released instead in which Mr Hunt praised the mining magnate's Minderoo Foundation.

Government MPs earlier blasted Mr Forrest for inviting China's Victorian Consul-General Long Zhou to speak unannounced at a press conference with Mr Hunt on Wednesday, at a time when -relations between the two countries are frayed over Australia's call for an independent coronavirus probe.

But Mr Forrest yesterday denied that he was acting against the interests of Australia by giving a voice to a Chinese Communist Party official, citing Mr Zhou's help securing personal protective equipment and 10 million testing kits for all Australians.

"I'm the most Australian person I know … I put Australia first," he said. "I run the -oranges out to the game for Australia, not China or America …," Mr Forrest said.

"China stepped up so I brought the Consul-General along when we broke the back of the PPE crisis in Perth."  To add to the controversy, Mr Forrest's Chinese partner in supplying the COVID-19 test kits is the Beijing Genomics Institute (BGI), whose president once boasted of a corporate culture verging on eugenics.

In a panel discussion in 2018, Wang Jian declared that BGI staff are forbidden to have children with birth defects.

"If they were born with defects, it would be a disgrace to all 7000 staff," Mr Wang said, according to an English translation by Shanghai United Media publication Sixth Tone.

Mr Wang declared that none of the 1400 babies born to company employees have defects.

Employees also are not -allowed to have heart bypass surgery but must rely on "gene tech and clean living to prevent cardiovascular disease". BGI also tracks the dining habits of employees and has disabled its elevators.

Mr Forrest and wife Nicola helped secure the Chinese-made test kits through their charitable Minderoo Foundation for use across Australia.

The kits give the nation's largest pathology providers Sonic Healthcare and Healius greater capacity to test for COVID-19 as part of a threefold increase in total daily testing capability.

The Minderoo Foundation also has secured 100,000 nasal swabs for use in COVID-19 testing, which will augment existing supplies.

Long-stemmed swabs already procured by the government in China are incompatible with the existing Australian pathology supply chain, according to Victorian manufacturing sources.

They are too long to fit into the Australian standard sterile tube and the snap point on the shaft is in the wrong place. Clinicians in Victoria are understood to be concerned that the shaft has to be forcibly snapped leaving a jagged edge that could pierce gloves.

"This has become dangerous for clinicians as they struggle to break the swab shaft elsewhere while attempting to ensure that the snapped shaft, potentially coated in COVID-19 rich mucous, does not pierce scarce PPE and risk infection of the -clinician or nurse," said the source.

It is not known what sized swab Mr Forrest has secured.

Meanwhile, Sydney Chinese consul-general Gu Xiaoji yesterday launched a new PR offensive to deflect blame over the origins of the virus.

"Wuhan laboratory has nothing to do with the origin of the novel coronavirus," the office tweeted.

A spokesman for the Sydney consulate also issued a statement on its website claiming it was "impossible" the virus could have escaped from a Chinese laboratory.

"The research facility is a biosafety level 4 laboratory that is able to deal with the world's deadliest pathogens," the spokesman claimed.

US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo yesterday praised Australia's call for an independent inquiry into the origins of the coronavirus.

It comes after China's ruling Communist Part angrily dismissed Canberra's calls. Mr Pompeo, who has piled pressure on China over the pandemic, waded into the dispute as he sarcastically said that Australia upset Beijing through its "temerity" to ask questions. "Who in the world wouldn't want an investigation of how this happened to the world?" Pompeo told -reporters in Washington.  "The solution to this crisis will come from freedom-loving people around the world."While we know this -started in Wuhan, China, we don't yet know from where it started and despite our best efforts to get experts on the ground, they continue to try to hide."
---
AUSSIE wheat farmers have become the latest victims of China's vendetta against our nation, with the communist state slashing its Australian wheat imports to an almost 10-year low.

It comes as Beijing ramps up its attack on Australian farm commodities and threatens to disrupt international trade worth hundreds of millions of dollars a year.

China imported 880 tonnes of Australian wheat in November - the lowest amount since 2011 - according to customs data, as tensions between Beijing and Canberra show no signs of abating.

Australia exports about $4.6 billion worth of wheat a year globally, with China accounting for about 10 per cent of it.

Beijing's tightening on Australian wheat comes amid a blockbuster crop for Australian farmers, with production forecast to more than double this season to about 31 million tonnes, according to the Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics (ABARE).

China's communist regime has already slapped punitive tariffs or banned a range of Australian products from barley, timber and beef, to wine and seafood after Scott Morrison sought an inquiry into the origins of COVID-19. FULL REPORT IN BUSINESS P60-61
---
'Those who have caused problems should be the ones to solve problems," China's Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao -Lijian told Australian reporters last week.

Very well, then. We'll let China get on with solving the coronavirus. Or we would, if the Chinese dictatorship showed any inclination to do so. As matters stand, China's communists won't even agree to an investigation of the virus's origins.

Asking for information on the Wuhan flu only enrages them.

"China is angry. If you make China the enemy, China will be the enemy," a Chinese government official told a Nine reporter last week.

That outburst followed the deliberate leaking of a Chinese government document that listed 14 specific grievances with Australia.

They include "spearheading a crusade" over China's intrusions into Taiwan and Hong Kong, banning Huawei spyware from the 5G network, blocking Chinese investment in crucial areas of Australian infrastructure and agriculture and, of course, calling for an independent investigation into the origins of COVID-19.

Everything would be tickety-boo if Australia complied with these directives. As Nine political editor Chris Uhlmann summarised: "All can be repaired if we are willing to muzzle our media, shut down our think tanks, sell off strategic assets and shut up about the origins of COVID-19. Simple." Not too much to ask, really. Maybe we could get Kevin Rudd, that petition bloke, to act as a go-between.

"Our two countries have different political systems," Rudd once told a Chinese interviewer. "We also have slight differences in our political values." Only slight differences, mind.

On the one hand, we have voting, which is how we dumped Rudd in 2013. On the other, China has Xi Jinping, whether they want him or not.

Another slight difference is Australia not forcing ethnic minorities to work in slave labour camps. Also, we don't send bills for bullets to the families of executed dissidents, mainly because we don't execute them in the first place.

You know, maybe Rudd isn't really our go-to guy on this. He lacks nuance. Perhaps the ABC's Stan Grant could assist. On Saturday, Grant invited his readers to "imagine for a moment the view from Beijing".

Or from Ultimo. Same deal, really.

"The Chinese Communist Party has overseen an economic miracle. In three decades it has taken a country that once could not feed itself and turned it into an economic powerhouse," Grant wrote.

Capitalism, even in state-controlled form, always creates wealth. This is not a miracle.

"China's rise has been peaceful. It has joined in a global rules based order: a member of the World Trade Organisation, the World Health Organisation, a permanent five member of the UN's Security Council." He means peaceful tyranny by unaccountable international forces. "It is a signatory to global compacts like the Paris Climate Accords and engages in peacekeeping and -humanitarian operations." How's the peace going in Hong Kong lately? Also from Grant, Beijing's all-seeing interpreter: "When Australia calls for an inquiry into the origins of coronavirus without first liaising with China, why wouldn't Beijing be annoyed?" Better questions: why doesn't peaceful, humanitarian Beijing run an open inquiry, and why should Australia trust the findings of any bogus UN-associated "investigation"?