The COVID-19 controversy continues to rage with more evidence for the lab theory By the day, it's looking less likely that the coronavirus pandemic began with unhygienic exotic animals at the Wuhan wet market.

There is now also global scientific debate among geneticists, immunologists and virologists about whether SARS-CoV-2 was genetically altered or is a naturally occurring virus.

The conversation is moving quickly as more evidence emerges about COVID-19, now that scientists have had time to conduct detailed analysis of its genetic properties.

While intelligence agencies continue to probe the origins of the virus, a longstanding former member of the community contributed to the conversation this week with his view it may have originated in a laboratory.

The former boss of MI6, Sir Richard Dearlove, told The Telegraph in the UK it's possible COVID-19 was manufactured in a laboratory and he believes the pandemic "started as an accident".

His comments came days after Australia's former head of ASIO, DFAT and Defence, Dennis Richardson, told me accidents can happen in laboratories and there should be a security review of bio-containment facilities- -globally in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic.

Just as significant were comments made by the Chinese Centre for Disease Control director, Gao Fu, who said the wet market helped spread the virus but was not the original source of the outbreak. This was an extraordinary statement from a senior member of the Chinese scientific community.

Several serious scientific papers have now also distanced the original outbreak from the wet market.

One of these is a scientific paper by Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard and the University of British Columbia, awaiting peer review, which stated that there is currently no evidence to show that the coronavirus originated in the wet market.

"There has been considerable debate among scientists and the public on whether SARS-CoV-2 originated from the Wuhan Huanan seafood market," the paper states.

"However, phylogenetic tracking suggests that SARS-CoV-2 had been imported into the market by humans." China has either destroyed or suppressed most of the evidence from the earliest cases of COVID-19, bleaching market stalls, reportedly killing animals from the market and expunging virus samples that had been sent for testing.

There is now an emerging view in the scientific community that COVID-19 may have been created in a laboratory.

A number of European scientists no longer believe in a natural origin of the SARS-CoV-2 virus after studying -hundreds of papers on the matter. Their view is mostly based on two -characteristics about COVID-19 that scientists say are highly unusual.

The first is that it binds to a human ACE2 receptor cells more strongly than it does to any other animal.

The second is that it has a furin cleavage site insert at the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2 which its closest genetic bat-coronavirus relative, RaTG-13, does not have. This makes it highly -infectious to humans.

It's this sequence Dearlove referred to, referencing a scientific paper. "Such an insertion is very rare in evolution, the addition of such four amino acids alone in the course of only 20 years is very unlikely," Israeli geneticist, Dr Ronen Shemesh, who is working on a treatment for COVID-19, told me.

He said he believes genetic engineering "is the only way an insertion like the furin protease cleavage site could have been introduced directly at the right place and become effective".

A preprint paper by the Nobel prize winner, Luc Montagnier, and colleague, Jean Claude Perez, claims there are genetic fragments of the HIV1, HIV2 and SIV retroviruses present in the -genome of COVID-19.

Their hypothesis is it is a "partially synthetic genome".

Other scientists say that this furin cleavage site could have occurred -naturally and vehemently reject the findings made by their colleagues.

The point is, this is now a matter of genuine scientific debate. Senior Australian government sources acknowledge this and say it would be "unwise to rule out the possibility" the virus was created in a laboratory.

The official government language is changing, too.

When I interviewed Minister for the Pacific and International Development Alex Hawke and chair of the Joint -Parliamentary Committee for Intelligence Andrew Hastie on my Sky -program this week neither said the wet market was the most likely source of the outbreak.

"I think there's a lot of contentions about (the origin) and all of them -deserve to have some consideration and serious consideration," Hawke said.

Hastie said "we have to be open-minded about all possibilities". "We can't rush to any sort of -judgment, we should have an open mind and an open mind is for closing," he said.

Asked why he thinks the left section of the media wants to exclude the -possibility COVID-19 may have leaked from a laboratory, he said: "Politics it seems is everywhere including in the media.

"As far as I'm concerned we should be open-minded and we shouldn't jump to conclusions so let's hope this issue isn't weaponised any further and we get to the bottom of it." How deeply the world has been affected by COVID-19 - from the lives lost to the devastating economic destruction - has given rise to a global parliamentary bipartisan group set up to tackle China's handling of the pandemic and its rising authoritarianism.

While well-known UK-based think-tank strategist Samuel Armstrong was a driving force in forming this global group, Hastie, James Paterson and Kimberley Kitching were among the core organisers who made it happen.

Tim Wilson, Amanda Stoker, Claire Chandler and Alex Antic are other -inaugural Liberal members.

"This is the Wolverines gone global," Paterson said.

The group, called the Inter-Parliamentary Alliance on China, will tackle Beijing's crackdown on human rights, the handling of Hong Kong, the Uighurs, the South China Sea, and more.

"We have German Greens and Canadian Liberals and British Conservatives. These are not normally people who agree with each other. But on China we do," Paterson said.

"We can find strength in this broad global solidarity which I believe will only grow and expand from here." It's China's cover-up of the virus that has brought such an unlikely group of MPs from all political stripes together. And this group will need every ounce of strength, resolution and drive to get to the bottom of the -pandemic's origins.
---
Fears China lab virus origin theory could be WMD 2.0

THERE are concerns at senior levels of the Australian government that the United States' position that COVID-19 most likely leaked from a Wuhan laboratory is akin to their claims Saddam Hussein had weapons of mass destruction.

The concerns centre around a lack of substantial evidence to support the line of inquiry, pushed most strongly by the US, that COVID-19 was inadvertently released from the Wuhan Institute of Virology.

The theory is being investigated by the Five Eyes Intelligence network of Australia, New Zealand, Canada, the US and the UK.

But in recent days it has been promoted as the most likely cause of the outbreak by US President Donald Trump and Secretary of State, Mike Pompeo, who said there was "significant evidence" to support it.

The Daily Telegraph understands the Five Eyes network, including its security and intelligence agencies in the US and Australia, is not aware of the nature of this "overwhelming evidence" that Mr Pompeo and Mr Trump claim.

The Daily Telegraph understands the government's central concern is that the US may be putting undue emphasis on the theory the virus originated in a Wuhan laboratory and could be making the same mistake that George Bush and Tony Blair made when they pressured the UN weapons inspector to declare that Saddam Hussein possessed weapons of mass destruction, which was the validation for a second allied attack on Iraq.

In recent days Mr Trump said he has seen evidence that he was not allowed to share which supported the theory the coronavirus was an accidental leak from a level 4 bio-containment facility in Wuhan, where there have been concerns about safety practices.

It is understood that Australia has seen all of the evidence the US possesses under the intelligence sharing arrangement, and there is nothing to strongly or even reasonably suggest the naturally-occurring virus came out of the laboratory rather than the wet market.

It comes as sources told The Daily Telegraph the schism between the US executives' position on China's culpability for the outbreak and the intelligence agencies has put Scott Morrison in an awkward position.

The PM is trying to build support for a transparent and independent inquiry into the origins and the handling of the outbreak.

Mr Morrison is taking a more nuanced approach that avoids direct accusations against China as he seeks to build consensus for an inquiry at the World Health Assembly in Geneva next month.

Mr Morrison wrote to the G20 nations on Monday, pitching a review into the pandemic response.

"What's really important is that we have a proper review, an independent review, which looks into the sources of these things in a transparent way so we can learn the lessons," he said.

It is understood Mr Morrison does not want to publicly undermine comments made by either Mr Trump or Mr Pompeo.The issue has come to the fore after The Daily Telegraph revealed a dossier compiled by concerned western governments that lays out the case of negligence against China over its cover-up of the outbreak. The document does not overly focus on whether the virus originated from a laboratory, instead it centres on China's abject failings in its handing of the outbreak.
---
THE COVID FILES SNUBBED MAGNATE DEFENDS CHINA STANCE

THE controversy over And-rew Forrest's China connections escalated yesterday when a cancer funding ann-ouncement with the Health Minister was cancelled amid disturbing revelations about the Chinese genomic company which supplied COVID-19 test kits to the billionaire's charity.

Mr Forrest and Health Minister Greg Hunt were due to visit Melbourne's Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, to announce a $67 million package for kids with cancer.

But the event was called off at late notice and a joint -statement released instead in which Mr Hunt praised the mining magnate's Minderoo Foundation.

Government MPs earlier blasted Mr Forrest for inviting China's Victorian Consul-General Long Zhou to speak unannounced at a press conference with Mr Hunt on Wednesday, at a time when -relations between the two countries are frayed over Australia's call for an independent coronavirus probe.

But Mr Forrest yesterday denied that he was acting against the interests of Australia by giving a voice to a Chinese Communist Party official, citing Mr Zhou's help securing personal protective equipment and 10 million testing kits for all Australians.

"I'm the most Australian person I know … I put Australia first," he said. "I run the -oranges out to the game for Australia, not China or America …," Mr Forrest said.

"China stepped up so I brought the Consul-General along when we broke the back of the PPE crisis in Perth."  To add to the controversy, Mr Forrest's Chinese partner in supplying the COVID-19 test kits is the Beijing Genomics Institute (BGI), whose president once boasted of a corporate culture verging on eugenics.

In a panel discussion in 2018, Wang Jian declared that BGI staff are forbidden to have children with birth defects.

"If they were born with defects, it would be a disgrace to all 7000 staff," Mr Wang said, according to an English translation by Shanghai United Media publication Sixth Tone.

Mr Wang declared that none of the 1400 babies born to company employees have defects.

Employees also are not -allowed to have heart bypass surgery but must rely on "gene tech and clean living to prevent cardiovascular disease". BGI also tracks the dining habits of employees and has disabled its elevators.

Mr Forrest and wife Nicola helped secure the Chinese-made test kits through their charitable Minderoo Foundation for use across Australia.

The kits give the nation's largest pathology providers Sonic Healthcare and Healius greater capacity to test for COVID-19 as part of a threefold increase in total daily testing capability.

The Minderoo Foundation also has secured 100,000 nasal swabs for use in COVID-19 testing, which will augment existing supplies.

Long-stemmed swabs already procured by the government in China are incompatible with the existing Australian pathology supply chain, according to Victorian manufacturing sources.

They are too long to fit into the Australian standard sterile tube and the snap point on the shaft is in the wrong place. Clinicians in Victoria are understood to be concerned that the shaft has to be forcibly snapped leaving a jagged edge that could pierce gloves.

"This has become dangerous for clinicians as they struggle to break the swab shaft elsewhere while attempting to ensure that the snapped shaft, potentially coated in COVID-19 rich mucous, does not pierce scarce PPE and risk infection of the -clinician or nurse," said the source.

It is not known what sized swab Mr Forrest has secured.

Meanwhile, Sydney Chinese consul-general Gu Xiaoji yesterday launched a new PR offensive to deflect blame over the origins of the virus.

"Wuhan laboratory has nothing to do with the origin of the novel coronavirus," the office tweeted.

A spokesman for the Sydney consulate also issued a statement on its website claiming it was "impossible" the virus could have escaped from a Chinese laboratory.

"The research facility is a biosafety level 4 laboratory that is able to deal with the world's deadliest pathogens," the spokesman claimed.

US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo yesterday praised Australia's call for an independent inquiry into the origins of the coronavirus.

It comes after China's ruling Communist Part angrily dismissed Canberra's calls. Mr Pompeo, who has piled pressure on China over the pandemic, waded into the dispute as he sarcastically said that Australia upset Beijing through its "temerity" to ask questions. "Who in the world wouldn't want an investigation of how this happened to the world?" Pompeo told -reporters in Washington.  "The solution to this crisis will come from freedom-loving people around the world."While we know this -started in Wuhan, China, we don't yet know from where it started and despite our best efforts to get experts on the ground, they continue to try to hide."
---
EXCLUSIVE Intel agencies uneasy about US virus claim

THE Australian government and its intelligence agencies are understood to be growing increasingly uneasy with the US President's bold claims COVID-19 probably leaked from a Wuhan laboratory.

The origins of coronavirus, and whether it inadvertently leaked from the Wuhan Institute of Virology, is the subject of an investigation by the Five Eyes Intelligence agencies of Australia, New Zealand, Canada, US and UK.

The Daily Telegraph understands the central concern emerging from the Australian government and its security- agencies is that the US may be putting undue emphasis on the theory the virus originated in a Wuhan laboratory.

In an extraordinary comparison, one senior federal source said there were emerging fears in the intelligence community that the US administration could be repeating mistakes made by George Bush and Tony Blair when they pressured the UN weapons inspector to declare Saddam- Hussein possessed weapons of mass destruction.

In recent days the lab-leak line of inquiry has been promoted as the most likely cause of the outbreak by US President Donald Trump and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, who said there was "a significant amount of evidence" to support it.

The Daily Telegraph understands Australia has seen all of the evidence the US possesses under the intelligence sharing arrangement and there is nothing yet to strongly suggest the naturally-occurring virus came out of the laboratory rather than the wet market. This has led to unrest within Australian intelligence agencies.

The ultimate goal of both the Australian and US governments is the same; seeing China held accountable for its negligence and cover-up of the outbreak which has cost tens of thousands of lives around the world.

On Saturday, The Daily Telegraph published a dossier compiled by concerned Western governments that lays out the case against China over its "suppression and destruction of evidence", its "deadly denial of human-to-human transmission" and its "assault on international transparency" as it sought to cover-up the coronavirus contagion.

While the end-goal of holding China accountable is consistent, the schism between the US executives' position on China's culpability for the outbreak and the Australian intelligence agencies has put Scott Morrison in an awkward position.

The Australian government's official- position is that COVID-19 most likely originated in a wet market and there is a 5 per cent chance it was born as a result of an accident in the Wuhan Institute of Virology.

Mr Morrison is taking a more nuanced- approach than the US that avoids direct accusations against China as he seeks to build consensus for an inquiry at the World Health Assembly in Geneva next month.

The Prime Minister wrote to the G20 nations on Monday, pitching a review into the pandemic response.

"What's really important is that we have a proper review, an independent review, which looks into the sources of these things in a transparent way so we can learn," he said.It is understood Mr Morrison does not want to publicly undermine comments- made by either Mr Trump or Mr Pompeo, with whom the Prime Minister has a particularly good rapport-. In recent days Mr Trump said he has seen evidence that he was not allowed to share which supported the theory the coronavirus was an accidental- leak from a facility in Wuhan, where there have been concerns about safety practices.
---
VIRUS ORIGINS AUSTRALIA'S former intelligence chief says it is possible COVID-19 could have leaked from a Wuhan laboratory and says a security review needs to be conducted of similar sites globally in the wake of the coronavirus pandemic.

Dennis Richardson, former head of foreign affairs, defence and ASIO, has also revealed there have been breaches of protocol at Australia's biosecurity laboratories, making the point "accidents do occur".

It comes amid extraordinary admissions by Chinese scientists that the wet market was not the source of the COVID-19 outbreak.

The Daily Telegraph can also reveal the Wuhan Institute of Virology, at the centre of a global probe into the outbreak of COVID-19, was given permission to engage in experimental research involving pathogenic viruses just 10 days before the first recorded case.

Mr Richardson (pictured) said while the origin of COVID-19 is not yet known, there should be a security review of high-level bio-containment facilities where deadly bat-derived coronaviruses are handled around the world.

"I think the security around such laboratories always has to be subject to review and I think everyone would hope that part of the review in respect of COVID-19 would be looking at security of facilities globally," he said.

"That is something which we need to be alert to globally. We have such facilities here in Australia and I do know that in the past there have been one or two accidents, at least on one occasion in the past that has been in the media.

"So accidents do occur. Just how good China's security is for its level 4 laboratories I simply don't know. The point I'm making is that accidents can happen regardless of the level of security and accidents have happened at level 4 facilities globally and it wouldn't surprise me if they've happened in China because they have happened elsewhere." On the prospect of an inadvertent leak of a naturally--occurring virus from a Wuhan laboratory, Mr Richardson said: "Put it this way, it is a possibility. However, I don't think it is wise to be pressing one possibility over another at this point.

"If you genuinely are interested in having a review, then it is absolutely essential that we have China's co-operation. We're not going to get China's co-operation if before the review even starts we have people drawing conclusions and wanting to throw around accusations without evidence." The Department of Agriculture told The Daily Telegraph there have been 37 breaches of biological material at biosecurity containment laboratories approved for research, analysis or testing of imported biological material since June 2013 out of 4563 audits. These related to the release, imminent release or movement of goods that are subject to biosecurity control or a "deliberate failure to comply with a departmental action." The Department of Health, which oversees a regulatory scheme for Security Sensitive Biological Agents, refused to reveal how many accidents there had been in its labs.
---
Record of poor practices coming to light from Wuhan Centre of Disease Control It's the lower security, and lower profile, Wuhan laboratory near the now infamous wet market where exotic animals, but not bats, are for sale.

The world has focused on the Wuhan Institute of Virology and its leading scientist, Shi Zhengli, who has become famous for her risky research, genetically altering bat-derived coronaviruses.

But the Wuhan Centre for Disease Control, which is closer to the wet market, has gone largely unnoticed in the outbreak of the virus.

This is changing and it's now becoming a site of great interest to experts and intelligence agencies analysing the spread of COVID-19.

The Wuhan Centre for Disease Control has a long history of poor safety practices.

There have been highly-concerning breaches of protocol where potentially virus-ridden bats came into direct contact with researchers not wearing protective equipment.

One senior scientist, Tian Junhua, went on the record to talk about how he was scratched, bitten and even urinated on by bats while taking samples out in the field.

"We can easily get contact with the faeces of bats which contaminate everything. So it is highly risky here. I feel the fear. The fear of infections," he said in a video posted in December, 2019.

Does this sound like a laboratory you would entrust with the role of handling highly-pathogenic coronavirus samples?

Absolutely not.

Yet, this is where some of the earliest samples of what was then understood to be a new pneumonia-like illness may have been sent.

Matthew Henderson, director of British think-tank, Henry Jackson Society's Asia Studies Centre, said when people first started falling ill and were hospitalised in December with an unknown virus, he believes their samples were likely sent to the Wuhan Centre for Disease Control for testing.

He expects intelligence agencies to now be having a closer look at the WCDC. "It is extremely important. (Shi Zhengli) was called back from Shanghai on the night of 30th December to receive that evening samples that were passed on at WIV from work that had been done by the Wuhan Centre for Disease Control," Mr Henderson said.

"(The WCDC) had been looking for some time at samples from patients taken from hospitals who had this novel coronavirus disease." The former British diplomat in East Asia, who spent a large part of his career in the British Foreign and Commonwealth Office, said the Wuhan Centre for Disease Control was likely also sampling the very first coronavirus in early December.

"The main work on this new virus that they'd taken samples from quite early in December, that work has not been done at the Wuhan Institute of Virology, it's been done somewhere else. To me the obvious candidate is WCDC," he said.

A dossier prepared by concerned western governments into China's cover-up of coronavirus, which I reported on a month ago, stated as part of China's "suppression and destruction of evidence" that "virus samples (were) ordered destroyed at genomics labs." Since then, China has admitted to destroying early samples of the virus. But authorities said they did so only in laboratories unauthorised to handle the highly-infectious virus.

Mr Henderson said it is likely that the Wuhan Centre for Disease Control was one of the laboratories required to destroy samples that had already been sent there because it did not have the highest level 4 biosecurity authorisation.

My Sky News mini-documentary tomorrow night, that looks at the laboratories at the centre of a global probe into the origins of the virus, reveals the Wuhan Centre for Disease Control censored the search of "bats" on their website.

Presumably this is to deflect attention from any work they were doing relating to bat-sampling.

Some of this material is already in the public domain.

"A scientist there who had a long career of working on bat sampling, he boasted in the press about how he had been peed on and scratched and had blood on him and had had to self-isolate at least twice," Mr Henderson said.

"He regarded his work as so important he was going to carry on anyway. He said on one occasion he even forgot to take his protective clothing along to do some sampling in the field.

"He was also working on lab ventures, he and his colleagues were working with samples taken from patients with COVID-19.

"If that's the way they were doing their samples in the field, that's the way they were treating biosecurity, it is a reasonable inference, that probably standards there were not so high." Accidents and leaks in laboratories are not uncommon.

A 2004 SARS outbreak was the result of safety breaches at a top Beijing virology laboratory where two young scientists were infected. I look at the safety issues of both Wuhan biosecurity laboratories in a Sky News "special" tomorrow night at 7.30pm. The repeated breaches of protocol at the labs, and the warnings that were ignored, clearly paint the picture of a bio-accident waiting to happen.
---
THE COVID FILES TOP MILITARY SCIENTIST HAS TIES WITH CSIRO

A SCIENTIST employed by China's People's Liberation Army, who has been genetically modifying coronaviruses and studying transmission from animals to humans, has had a longstanding professional relationship with the director of Australia's top bio-containment facility.

The Daily Telegraph can reveal the director of Australia's Animal Health Laboratory Dr Trevor Drew had a working relationship for at least seven years with a senior scientist employed by the PLA's Academy of Military Medical Sciences, Dr Tu Changchun.

The Daily Telegraph has obtained photographs of Dr Drew's visits to meet with Dr Tu in 2009 and 2016. One photo shows him smiling and holding Dr Tu up in the air during this trip.

Their relationship was forged through the Jilin University, where Dr Drew was a visiting professor of virology from 2009 to 2014 and, maintaining a relationship, visited again in 2016 while on a trip to China to lead "projects to improve China's capacity for the prevention, detection and control of rabies and Swine Fever." Jilin University, in the city of Changchun in China's northeast province, has -secret-level security credentials, "allowing it to participate in research and production for classified weapons and defence technology projects", according to Australian security analysts who have classified it "very high risk" for its high level of defence research.

The revelation comes amid calls from members of the Morrison Government for a federal oversight body to ensure there is no foreign -interference in the research sector, and to give checks and balances to foreign partnerships.

As well as being a -researcher at the Institute of Military Veterinary Medicine of the Chinese PLA's Academy of Military Medical Sciences, Tu Changchun is also a professor at Jilin University, according to both his biography and a now-deleted press-release on the university's website.

GENETIC ENGINEERING In his biography, his research direction is listed as "virus disease" and a description of his scientific research projects centres on genetic engineering of viruses.

At Dr Tu's page at the Jilin University website, it speaks about his work genetically modifying coronaviruses and other infectious diseases to see if they are transmissible to humans.

"Research on the source of SARS coronavirus transmission: by means of gene amplification, serological detection and virus isolation, the detection, isolation and identification of coronavirus in wild animals and domestic animals and poultry, so as to find the animal origin of SARS virus and study the virus the origin," an excerpt from his page at Jilin University states.

"Then, through animal -inoculation tests, SARS virus susceptible animals are screened to study the animal-human transmission route." Along with many other Chinese researchers in this field, Changchun Tu's research affiliated with the Academy of Military Medical Sciences often involves finding new diseases that come from animals.

MILITARY RESEARCH The Academy of Military Sciences is the highest-level research institute of the -People's Liberation Army, -according to PLA Daily.

The Australian Strategic Policy Institute's China's defence university tracker states that Jilin University works closely with China's nuclear weapons complex and hosts at least two defence research labs.

 They are located in its College of Computer Science and Technology and in the College of Chemistry. "Its Key Laboratory of Attack and Defence Simulation Technology for Naval Warfare, Ministry of Education is involved in -cybersecurity research for the Navy," the ASPI project states. "The lab's academic committee is headed by a computer scientist from China Aerospace Science and Technology Corporation, a leading state-owned missile manufacturer." Dr Tu is also listed on the Wuhan Institute of Virology's website as sitting on the scientific advisory committee of its Centre for Emerging -Infectious Diseases - the -institute at the centre of the global probe into the origins of the coronavirus.

The Daily Telegraph has previously revealed that two scientists from the Wuhan -Institute of Virology, Shi Zhengli and Peng Zhou, who are a focus of the Five Eyes -intelligence probe into the -origins of COVID-19, have worked at the CSIRO in Australia where they conducted research on live bats.

This Wuhan Institute of Virology committee on which Dr Tu sits is headed by Linfa Wang, according to the website. Dr Linfa Wang, while an Honorary Professor of the Wuhan Institute of Virology between 2005 and 2011 also worked in the CSIRO Office of the Chief Executive Science Leader in Virology -between 2008 and 2011.

OVERSIGHT DEMANDS There is no suggestion Dr Drew has engaged in any untoward or unethical research through his relationship with Dr Tu. Questions for him were answered by the CSIRO.

A spokesman for the CSIRO said Dr Drew did not receive a salary or any financial benefit from Jilin Uni-versity and has never studied bat diseases. The CSIRO -defended its links with other research institutes.

"To enable collaboration, CSIRO employees are often members of affiliate research institutes, committees and other bodies both in Australia and overseas. When entering into any such arrangement, CSIRO staff are bound by CSIRO's code of conduct and related policies and procedures," it said.

Liberal MPs including Matt Canavan, Sarah Henderson and Jim Molan say partnerships between Australia and Chinese universities show an oversight body is needed to -maintain integrity in the -research sector which is among those vulnerable to foreign influence.

The Australian Strategic Policy Institute lists Jilin University as "very high risk for its high level of defence -research and links to China's nuclear weapons program".

Its project states Jilin University is directly under the Ministry of Education and came under the joint supervision of the ministry and -defence industry agency, SASTIND, in 2016.

ASPI's executive director, Peter Jennings said Chinese President Xi Jinping has brought China's university sector closer to the PLA and intelligence. "We need to now look much more carefully at those partnerships with Chinese universities to make sure there are no military implications and in particular areas of research that Australia could be doing that could benefit the PLA," he said.The CSIRO has refused to publish details of its Chinese partnerships.
---
Exclusive: Lib MP calls for end to foreign research trips

A LIBERAL Senator has called for all virus research by foreign scientists in Australian laboratories to stop until a safety and national security review is done.

The call from Morrison government member Sarah Henderson follows revelations by The Daily Telegraph that the CSIRO's bio-containment facility in Geelong, Victoria has been engaging in research jointly funded by the Australian and Chinese governments.

The studies were in conjunction with the Wuhan Institute of Virology which is now at the centre of a global probe into the origins of the COVID-19 outbreak.

"I am calling on the CSIRO's Australian Animal Health Laboratory - now known as the Australian Centre for Disease Preparedness - to conduct a full review into its virus research program involving foreign nationals," she said.

Former Defence Minister and shadow cabinet member Joel Fitzgibbon backed the calls for an independent review last night.FULL REPORT PAGE 6
---
Aussie link to China military lab

CHINA'S People's Liberation Army has been involved in scientific research - co-funded by the Australian government - into the origins of the coronavirus.

In an explosive revelation, a study co-funded by the Australian Research Council and the Chinese government - and trumpeted by The University of Sydney as helping to unlock the genetic code of COVID-19 - relied on a laboratory in the People's Liberation Army's Academy of Military Medical Sciences to conduct its "genetic sequencing" and "virus isolation".

The director of this institute, Professor Wu-Chan Cao, who is thanked in the paper's acknowledgments for his "substantial contribution", has the rank of colonel and is also a Wuhan Institute of Virology board member - the same facility which is at the centre of a global probe into whether the naturally-occurring coronavirus was accidentally released from its laboratory or came from a local wet market. The study includes one of two scientific papers on the coronavirus undertaken by University of Sydney virologist and evolutionary biologist, Professor Edward Holmes.FULL REPORT PAGES 4-5
---
PRIME Minister Scott Morrison insists Australia should back an inquiry into the origin of the COVID-19 -outbreak as US President Donald Trump suggests China unleashed the virus as a "mistake".

Mr Morrison said his government would speak in favour of a European Union resolution to set up an independent investigation into the outbreak. The resolution will be put to the World Health Assembly meeting in Geneva later this month.

Asked what he thought of a -suggestion the virus could have emerged from a Chinese laboratory, Mr Morrison said he had seen no -evidence to suggest that had been the likely source.

"The reports (about the Wuhan lab) … they were public, they were being reported at the time, so of course the government was aware of those suggestions," he said.

"There hasn't been anything subsequent that would have borne out those initial reports as far as our -government is concerned." The PM said the "most likely -scenario that has been canvassed relates to wildlife wet markets".

"This is one of the reasons why it is important we have an objective, -independent assessment of how this originated and learn the lessons of how this occurred," he said.

Mr Morrison said the investigation being recommended to the global assembly was an entirely sensible -suggestion and would help countries respond more quickly to future outbreaks.

However, Mr Trump speculated that China could have unleashed the coronavirus on the world due to a horrible "mistake", and his intelligence agencies said they were still examining the idea - put forward by the president and aides - that the pandemic may have resulted from an accident at a Chinese laboratory.

The Office of the Director of National Intelligence, the clearing house for the web of US spy agencies, said it had ruled out the virus being man-made but was still investigating the precise source of the global pandemic, which has killed more than 220,000 people worldwide.

Mr Trump suggested he had seen evidence to support the theory that the origin was an infectious disease lab in Wuhan, the epicentre of the Chinese outbreak, and said the US was now "finding how it came out".

"It's a terrible thing," he said. "Whether they made a mistake or whether it started off as a mistake and then they made another one, or did somebody do something on purpose." The US Intelligence Community (IC) statement said the federal -agencies concurred "with the wide scientific consensus that the COVID-19 virus was not man-made or genetically modified".

"The IC will continue to rigorously examine emerging information and intelligence to determine whether the outbreak began through contact with infected animals or if it was the result of an accident at -a laboratory in Wuhan," the statement said.

Earlier yesterday, Mr Morrison said Australia was working "every day" on its relationship with China.

Chinese ambassador to Australia Cheng Jingye has floated the idea of a consumer boycott of Australian -products in retaliation if Canberra supports the investigation into the outbreak.Liberal MP Trent Zimmerman said Chinese diplomats had been "downright despicable and menacing" since Australia started pressing the case for a review.
---
RESEARCH LINKS LIBERAL MP Sarah Henderson says all virus research with foreign nationals should be stopped until a safety and national security review is done.

The call from a member of the Morrison government follows revelations by The Daily Telegraph that the CSIRO's bio-containment facility in Geelong, Victoria has been engaging in research, jointly funded by the Australian and Chinese governments, in conjunction with the Wuhan Institute of Virology which is now the centre of a global probe into the origins of the COVID-19 outbreak.

Senator Henderson told The Telegraph the partnership was "very concerning" from a security and safety perspective.

"I am calling on the CSIRO's Australian Animal Health Laboratory - now known as the Australian Centre for Disease Preparedness - to conduct a full review into its virus research program involving foreign nationals so as to consider all of the national security and biosecurity risks," "This sort of research involving foreign nationals should be put on hold until the review is conducted." Senator Henderson spoke of major security concerns laboratories in the United States and Canada had faced, including attempts to steal virus samples to send back to China, and said a security review should be done of CSIRO's lab.

"The cyber security of our high containment laboratories also needs to be reviewed," she said.

"In January this year, a Harvard professor and two Chinese scientists based in Boston were charged with assisting the Chinese government.

"One of the researchers was arrested at an airport on his way to China with 21 vials of biological samples in his bag." Senator Henderson said while there was no suggestion that any incident occurred at the laboratory in Geelong, this type of research also carried with it very high risks including the threat of a pandemic.

"In 2016, the United States Government Accountability Office identified that -improved oversight of dangerous pathogens in high containment laboratories was required to mitigate risk," she said.

"In 2019, the Bulletin of Atomic Scientists identified that human error in high---bio containment laboratories was a likely pandemic threat. It makes clear that incidents causing potential exposures to pathogens occur frequently in high security laboratories - like the one in Wuhan." Her call comes after a dossier prepared by concerned western governments includes mention of the research that was being undertaken at the Wuhan Institute Of Virology.

The United States has -withdrawn funding from the institute.A CSIRO spokesman said it had no current research involving live bats.
---
WHO TAKES CHINA'S SIDE IN HASTY COVID INQUIRY

THE World Health Organisation's hurried report into the origins of the coronavirus was slammed as an "unsatisfactory" whitewash designed to protect the Chinese government from embarrassment, just hours after handing down its findings.

Speaking in China on Tuesday night, WHO investigators dismissed the possibility that the virus may have escaped from the controversial Wuhan Institute of Vir-ology while leaving the door open to the possibility that the virus may have been imported from another country.

Peter Embarek, one of the scientists who made up the delegation, said finding the origin of COVID was a "work in progress".

But he said COVID-19 most likely made the jump to humans through an unknown animal source.

The theory that the virus may have escaped from a local lab where scientists were known to be conducting "gain of function" tests on -viruses similar to the coronavirus was dismissed out of hand as "extremely unlikely", according to Embarek.

But more needs to be known before the possibility can be dismissed, according to a number of scientists and experts critical of China's handling of the pandemic.

"It's unsatisfactory, dismissing possibilities without providing evidence for why," said vaccine researcher Prof Nikolai Petrovski, who is the Director of Endocrinology at Flinders University Medical Centre in South Australia.

"They seem to have signed up to the Chinese government's position, which is that this didn't come from China, and that it might have come in to China on frozen food packaging. Why are they -saying that and what is the evidence?" "We are entitled to the facts they are using to dismiss different possibilities, and to know if they have dealt with the question marks around how the virus got this feature or that feature." Others were similarly sceptical.

"The WHO mission is compromised because Beijing is choreographing the team's visit. And the delegation -includes some China apologists," academic and author Clive Hamilton, who has written a number of books detailing the efforts of the Chinese Communist Party to subvert democracy in Australia and around the world, told The Daily Telegraph.

"It already looks like the WHO delegation is following Beijing's script." UNSW Professor Raina MacIntyre also said it was "expected" the WHO investigators would rule out the lab as where COVID-19 started, but that didn't mean it was the case.

"They do not provide any evidence for dismissing a lab leak," she said. Since the beginning of the pandemic, the Chinese government has tightly controlled information about the virus that could be embarrassing to the authoritarian regime, and suggested the virus might have been brought to Wuhan by visiting American military athletes or even on the surface of imported frozen food packaging.

China has also sought to punish Australian exporters by imposing billions of dollars worth of trade sanctions in retaliation for the Morrison government's pressing for an investigation into the -pandemic.

Nationals Senator Matt Canavan lashed the process, suggesting that any report into the virus delivered on Chinese soil was immediately compromised.

"It's a bit hard to believe the conclusions of this report when if the WHO had made certain findings, they may have been detained before -getting out of the country," he said.

"If journalists expressing views aren't safe in China, how can you expect health officials to be safe either?" Other Coalition MPs were just as scathing, with one -telling The Daily Telegraph it was "premature" to rule out the lab hypothesis "before they have found clear evidence of an alternative cause".

From the start, the WHO's investigation has been marred by controversy, with the Chinese government first delaying authorisation for the visit, and then tightly man-aging access for the inter-national delegation.

Despite the WHO's report, the theory that COVID-19's origins lie behind the gates of the secretive Wuhan Institute of Virology have gained currency in -recent days after being widely rubbished as a Donald Trump-style conspiracy theory when The Daily Telegraph reported on it last year.  Last week, the Washington Post published a blistering editorial saying that "the possibility of a laboratory -accident or leak … must be -investigated ... Wuhan (has) at least six facilities with BSL-3 laboratories for handling infectious agents," the paper's editorial board wrote.

And, soon after the WHO handed down its report, former US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo told Fox News in an interview: "I continue to know that there was significant evidence that this may well have come from that -laboratory."

5 years Length of Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sex Abuse 10 months Length of Warren Commission investigation into JFK's assassination 12 days World Health Organisation on-ground team's investigation into the origins of COVID-19 pandemic
---
HUNT FOR THE CURE GERM detectives and scientists have uncovered genetic mutations in coronavirus clusters circulating throughout Australia, giving them a chance to move a step ahead of the disease.

The breakthrough by Doherty Institute scientists and Victorian Department of Health contact tracers is vital to limiting the spread of community transmission of COVID-19.

By tracking the different mutations, specialists cannot just pinpoint the country a person's individual coronavirus infection originated from, but can also home in on the hospital, aged care centre, cruise or other local source they are linked to.

Armed with the new genomic sequencing, Associate Professor Deborah Williamson said contact tracers around Australia could identify everyone likely to be linked to a cluster, even if they did not have symptoms.

The genetic information also provides a clue as to where each cluster is likely to spread next, allowing more targeted isolation to stop each COVID-19 outbreak - which is needed to ease wider restrictions on the entire population.

"We are seeing clusters related to different outbreaks in different parts of the world," Assoc Prof Williamson said.

"The benefits are going to be in monitoring things like outbreaks in hospitals, outbreaks in aged care facilities, and looking at potential community transmission.

"If we did find there was an outbreak in a certain part of the community, then they could direct resources to that such as contact tracing, testing of those in that risk network." The Melbourne-based Doherty Institute is at the forefront of global efforts to find a COVID-19 cure. While its genomic sequencing will not overcome the virus, combining the information with the epidemiological work of contact tracers could be a key to restoring freedoms.

The findings are also being shared with scientists around the world to further research, as well as to increase the data available to Australian trace detectives. After identifying subtle differences hidden among the 30,000 characters in the genetic code of two coronavirus clusters circulating in Victoria, contact tracing detectives have already used the genomic sequencing technique to stop each spreading in recent weeks.

The Institute's scientists have now pored over samples from hundreds of COVID-19 patients to genetically sequence each person's infection, identifying telltale mutations in coronavirus imported from each country.

Despite the slowing curve, Australia's COVID-19 peak is still possibly ahead and Assoc Prof Williamson said it was vital all states began collecting samples to build up a complete set of sequencing before community transmission took off.

With a full set of sequencing data, any new cases emerging in the community could be instantly traced back to their origins to identify others unknowingly caught up in the cluster, or those who are about to be if they are not isolated.

"It's no good sequencing a few genomes just from one hospital, or from one outbreak. To get a proper handle on what's going on we need to be sequencing all of the genomes not just in Victoria, but in all of Australia," Assoc Prof Williamson said.

While genome sequencing has been used in Victoria to trace the source and get ahead of well-established infectious diseases such as salmonella and tuberculosis for the past five years, identifying COVID-19 mutations has been much more difficult for scientists around the globe.

Because the novel coronavirus only emerged four months ago its mutations have not had long to separate to a point where they are easily distinguishable.

But using powerful computers to overlay hundreds of samples from COVID-19 patients highlighted the smallest differences in the nucleotides of the RNA genome in patients already known to belong to certain clusters, providing a framework to identify related cases.

The COVID-19 mutations identified so far are not thought to provide an indication of the severity of each strain, but Assoc Prof Williamson said work was continuing to identify more differences as well as their role.

"It's easy to forget that four-and-a-half months ago we didn't even know this thing existed," she said.

"We are trying to cram years of expertise and knowledge into a few short months. "Every day we are learning something new about not just a virus, but ways to detect the virus, ways to control the outbreak."

NATIONAL COVID-19 HOT SPOTS WHERE GENOME MUTATION TRACKING COULD STOP THE SPREAD

QUEENSLAND ■North Brisbane 309 ■South Brisbane 239 ■Gold Coast 188 ■Sunshine Coast 89

NSW ■Blacktown 106 ■Byron Bay 16 ■Cumberland 66 ■Tamworth 12 ■Sydney Eastern Suburbs 261 ■Penrith10 ■Lake Macquarie 54 ■Ryde 66

ACT ■Tuggeranong 23 ■South Canberra 17 ■Gungahlin 17

TASMANIA ■North West Tasmania 97

VICTORIA ■Stonnington 87 ■Banyule 82 ■Greater Geelong 62 ■Melbourne 61

SOUTH AUSTRALIA ■Barossa Valley 40 ■Adelaide Airport 34

WESTERN AUSTRALIA ■Greater Perth region 403 ■Broome 11 ■Albany 7 ■Kalgoorlie 6 ■Halls Creek 4

DEFINITION The case definition of a confirmed case is a person who tests positive to a validated specific SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid test or has the virus identified by electron microscopy or viral culture, at a reference laboratory. The details on source of infection are subject to change as public health investigations and case interviews are ongoing.

GENOMICSGenomics is the study of whole genomes of organisms. It analyses the building blocks of cells such as DNA and RNA through sequencing to decode the fundamental structure and function of genomes. Genomic research has already been used to develop better understanding, tracking and defences against bacteria and viruses including meningococcal disease, salmonella, tuberculosis and cytomegalovirus, a member of the herpes family. Decoding can reveal mutations and allow scientists to act quickly to identify and isolate the source of the disease.
---
China infected the world, but some bureaucrats and media think the US is the real threat

The left-wing media is trying to paint the picture of a greatly divergent position between the United States administration and the Australian government on the outbreak of the coronavirus.

While those sentiments may exist within some elements of the Australian bureaucracy, the reality is Scott Morrison and Mike Pompeo have the same view of China's culpability for the outbreak of COVID-19.

The two men are very close, sharing many of the same values and beliefs. Whether or not the virus was created or leaked in a laboratory is a legitimate line of inquiry.

It's why the Office of the Director of National Intelligence issued a rare statement to confirm intelligence networks are investigating it.

Early evidence to the Morrison government didn't just claim that the virus accidentally leaked from a laboratory but that it may have been created there. This has now been ruled out.

But this entire matter of the origins of the virus is a side-show. It distracts from what we do know. And that is that China deliberately chose to hide or destroy evidence of the virus and instead allow hundreds of thousands of people to die all around the world.

It is an understatement to talk about western blood on the hands of President Xi Jinping and Chinese authorities.

Yet, so many are resisting an investigation into China's actions. Into how China destroyed evidence at genomics laboratories and in the wet market.

Into the disappearances or arrests of journalists, doctors, activists and scientists.

Into the insistence coronavirus couldn't be transmitted from person to person until January 20, when the first evidence emerged on December 6.

Into how China allowed millions of people to leave Wuhan after the outbreak with an untold number flying overseas, infecting countries the world over.

Shouldn't we all - regardless of where we sit on the political spectrum - be concerned about how China, an emerging superpower, handled this outbreak?

I'll repeat what former Defence Force Deputy Secretary, executive director of the Australian Strategic Policy Institute, Peter Jennings said to me: "While the origins of the virus is unclear, what's very clear is that China is trying to weaponise the virus now." Let's compare the political response to China's criminal actions with Russia's shooting down of flight MH17.

MH17 was not treated as a left or right issue. There was solidarity in calling for an investigation.

The unfortunate and sad reality is Australian politicians were less delicate with Russia. They were prepared to stand up and uphold our national interest. Yet the same approach is not being taken now when it comes to holding China to account.

It was easy to gang up on Russia as a natural villain because we don't have any critical trade or economic ties with them. But with China, our largest trading partner, our leaders are tongue-tied, mealy mouthed and struggle to even say that they no longer trust China. It's embarrassing.

Just the mention of an independent inquiry into their actions saw them threaten to cut off trade with Australia.

Imagine if Scott Morrison had threatened to shirt-front Xi Jinping. It would probably be World War III.

This shows we have already gone too far down the road of oppression of free speech, living by China's values, to avoid offence.

It shows we have become far too dependent on China for our prosperity and failed to diversify.

In the short term it's always going to be easier kowtowing to China because any trade-related impact China could impose on us would be felt immediately.

But we need to think longer-term about allowing a world superpower to be able to conduct itself like China is right now with no accountability, and with barely a critical word uttered from our leaders.

While Morrison's endgame is holding China to account, there is a bizarre war being waged by some in the bureaucracy against the US. It is without the government's backing.

There are small-time bureaucrats stirring up conflict with our closest ally, who actually shares our values.

These bureaucrats have their hands nowhere near the US intelligence on Wuhan which is managed by ASIS and the foreign ministry. Yet these bureaucrats, charged with protecting Australia's national security, have been trying to create a problem between the US and Australia, instead of focusing on the greater issue of China.

As I reported on The Daily Telegraph's front page on Wednesday, one senior federal source said there were emerging fears in the intelligence community that the US administration could be repeating mistakes made by George Bush when he pressured the UN weapons inspector to declare Saddam Hussein possessed weapons of mass destruction.

It really is an absurd comparison because the US is on the same page as Australia that the virus may have leaked from a laboratory and it needs to be investigated. The difference is Australia's need for diplomacy given our reliance on China versus the United States' politically expedient position to attack China.

The concerns of these bureaucrats do not accord with the Prime Minster's view. I repeat, these expendable bureaucrats do not share the same view of Scott Morrison. This is significant.

To that end, there has been criticism of one department head, Home Affairs boss Mike Pezzullo, from within the federal government.

"Mike spends a little too much time speaking to journalists," a government insider said.

Morrison's real focus is holding China to account.

As Mike Pompeo said yesterday: "China could have prevented the deaths of hundreds of thousands of people worldwide. China could have spared the world a descent into global economic malaise. They had a choice.

"China is still refusing to share the information we need to keep people safe, such as viral isolates, clinical specimens and details about the many COVID-19 patients in December 2019, not to mention 'patient zero'."The fact that an investigation into the origin and outbreak is being resisted heavily by China is all the evidence you need that they have something to hide.
---
THE COVID FILES OZ-FUNDED VIRUS PAPER USED MILITARY FACILITY

CHINA'S People's Liberation Army has been involved in scientific research, co-funded by the Australian government, into the origins of the coronavirus which has been published in esteemed medical journals.

In an explosive revelation, a study co-funded by the Australian Research Council and the Chinese government, and trumpeted by The University of Sydney as helping to solve the puzzle of how COVID-19 transferred from animals to humans, relied on a key laboratory in an institute in the People's Liberation Army's Academy of Military Medical Sciences to conduct its "genetic sequencing" and "virus isolation".

The director of the microbiology institute, Professor Wu-Chan Cao, who is thanked in the paper's acknowledgments for his "substantial contribution", has the rank of colonel and is a Wuhan Institute of Virology board member in a clear conflict of interest.

One of the study's co-authors, Yi-Gang Tong, began working in the same PLA-run microbiology institute in 2005.

The Wuhan Institute of Virology is at the centre of a global probe into whether the naturally-occurring coronavirus was accidentally released from its laboratory or came from a local wet market, which scientists believe is the most likely scenario.

This study is one of two scientific papers on the coronavirus undertaken by University of Sydney virologist and evolutionary biologist, Professor Edward Holmes in conjunction with researchers in China, who received funding from the Chinese government.

Professor Holmes is highly regarded in his field and the only western scientist that was part of the consortium of the Shanghai Public Health Clinical Centre and School of Public Health who first uploaded the genetic sequence of the coronavirus on January 11.

There is no suggestion that Professor Holmes' own contribution to the research project was anything but independent, ethical and of the highest scientific standards. His work on the papers was funded by Australian grants only.

His February 2020 study looked at whether an animal called a pangolin - and not only bats - could be an intermediate host of the coronavirus to facilitate its transfer to humans.

ARMY FACILITIES Professor Holmes has used this research to call for a ban on wet markets and the trade in wildlife.

The study titled "Identifying SARS-CoV-2 related coronaviruses in Malayan pangolins" was completed and submitted by February 7, 2020 and it was peer-reviewed and published in Nature online on March 26.

"Although bats are likely reservoir hosts for SARS-CoV-2, the identity of any intermediate host that might have facilitated transfer to humans is unknown," the study states in its summary. "Here we report the identification of SARS-CoV-2 relate coronaviruses in Malayan pangolins seized in anti-smuggling operations in southern China." The Daily Telegraph can reveal that the "sequencing" and "virus isolation" on which the study relied was done by laboratories run by the PLA in China.

In fine print at the very end of the paper in the acknowledgments section, it states: "We thank Prof. Wu-Chun Cao, Dr. Na Jia, Dr. Ya-Wei Zhang, Dr. Jia-Fu Jiang, Dr. Bao-Gui Jiang, and their team in State Key Laboratory of Pathogen and Biosecurity, Beijing Institute of Microbiology and Epidemiology, Beijing for their substantial contributions to this study, including co-ordinating among research parties, conducting virus isolation, qPCR and sequencing." The State Key Laboratory of Pathogen and Biosecurity is part of the Beijing Institute of Microbiology and Epidemiology, which sits under the Academy of Military Medical Sciences.

The Academy of Military Sciences is the highest-level research institute of the People's Liberation Army.

RANKING RESEARCHER The director of the Beijing Institute is Professor Wu-Chan Cao, who also received the top acknowledgment in the research paper for his "substantial contributions to this study" including "co-ordinating among research parties".

In his official biography he is pictured in his military uniform and it states he has the "rank of colonel".

"Now the director of the Institute of Microbiology and epidemiology, Military Medical Science Academy of the PLA, director of the State Key Laboratory of pathogen and Biosecurity," it states.

Colonel Cao also sits on the board for the Wuhan Institute of Virology's Scientific Advisory Committee of Centre for Emerging Infectious Diseases, according to its website.

A University of Sydney spokeswoman said Professor Holmes' work was "academically independent" and that he had not received any research or personal funding from the Chinese Government or Chinese companies or institutions.

"Where he has undertaken research with scientists from China his work has been funded by the Australian Research Council, the National Health and Medical Research Council and the University of Sydney," she said.

"We strongly defend the right of our researchers to collaborate with scientists around the world in line with all relevant Australian laws and government guidelines.

"Prof Holmes has no link with the Academy of Military Science. Their involvement with the research was declared in the acknowledgments, as is standard practice.

"Dr Cao co-ordinated the laboratory work before Prof Holmes' involvement. He did not direct or supervise the work of Prof Holmes which was undertaken independently." The University of Sydney website states: "Professor Holmes, a co-author, is the only non-China based academic on the paper." Another co-authored paper by Professor Holmes, published in Cell, provides commentary on samples taken from the Wuhan wet market and states "not all of the early (COVID-19) were market associated, it is possible that the emergence story is more complicated than first suspected".

This was cited in a press release by the Embassy of the People's Republic of China in the Commonwealth in Australia that criticised media coverage "playing up the so-called wet market in China".

WORRYING LINKS Charles Sturt University Professor of Public Ethics Clive Hamilton supported the calls for an oversight agency by Morrison government MPs.

While there was no doubting the honesty and professionalism of Australian researchers, legitimate questions should be asked as to the involvement of the Chinese military.

"It's clear that the universities are not properly overseeing the kinds of collaborations that their scientists are undertaking because there are many instances of sensitive research in Australian universities being done in collaboration with Chinese scientists with links to China's military or who are likely passing valuable information on to China's companies or intelligence -services," he said.

"Universities have been very reluctant to admit there is a problem and have consistently hidden behind the Defence Trade Controls Act which prohibits the export of sensitive technology but does not prohibit Chinese military scientists working on sensitive projects in Australian laboratories."The Australian Strategic Policy Institute's analysis of Chinese institutions has designated the Academy of Military Science very high risk as the PLA's premier institution for military science. It is -responsible for leading and co-ordinating military science for the whole military.
---
THE VOCID FILES VIRUS ORIGINS TWO Chinese scientists - who western intelligence agencies are looking into as part of their probe into the origins of the global coronavirus contagion - studied live bats in Australia in research jointly funded by the Australian and Chinese governments.

An investigation by The Daily Telegraph can reveal the Five Eyes intelligence agencies of Australia, Canada, NZ, UK and US, are understood to be looking closely at the work of a senior scientist at the Wuhan Institute of Virology, Peng Zhou, as they examine whether COVID-19 originated from a wet market or whether the naturally--occurring virus may have been released from the level four laboratory in Wuhan that was studying deadly coronavirus pathogens from bats.

The revelation comes as Australian politicians ramp up pressure on China to co--operate with an international investigation into the origins of the COVID-19 outbreak.

Chair of the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security, Andrew Hastie said: "The Chinese Communist Party must take responsibility for the virus that began inside their borders and work with the rest of the world to prevent it from happening again. We are simply asking for transparency and co-operation." The Australian government's position is the virus most likely originated from the Wuhan wet markets but it is possible it was accidentally released from a laboratory.

It can be revealed that Zhou - the head of the Bat Virus Infection and Immunity Project at the Wuhan Institute of Virology - spent three years at the bio-containment facility, Australian Animal Health Laboratory between 2011 and 2014, where he was sent by China to complete his doctorate.

During this time, Zhou arranged for wild-caught bats to be transported alive by air from Queensland to the Australian Animal Health Laboratory in Victoria where they were euthanised for dissection and studied for deadly viruses.

His work was funded jointly by the CSIRO and the Chinese Academy of Sciences. It examined bat immunology and the role of interferons and how "bats are rich reservoirs for emerging viruses, including many that are highly pathogenic to humans and other mammals" and "many of which cause significant morbidity and mortality in humans and other mammals."

HIGHLY-RISKY WORK The research is designed to prevent the next pandemic by understanding how viruses can be transmitted from bats to humans to cause coronaviruses. But the work is considered highly risky and there have been fears in recent years that any inadvertent leak could cause a worldwide pandemic.

The other scientist being looked at is Shi Zhengli, who is the director of the Centre for Emerging Infectious Diseases at the Chinese Academy of Sciences' Wuhan Institute of Virology. Zhengli also spent time in Australia as a visiting scientist for three months from February 22 to May 21, 2006 where she worked at the CSIRO's top-level Australian Animal Health Laboratory.

She used faecal samples of horseshoe bats to identify that they were the natural host for SARS-like coronaviruses.

When the COVID-19 outbreak occurred in Wuhan, Zhengli said she had sleepless nights worrying whether it was released from her laboratory - but has since strongly denied this occurred.

The Daily Telegraph does not suggest the two scientists are responsible for the outbreak or spread of COVID-19, but merely that they have come to the attention of intelligence agencies.

On November 18 last year, shortly before the outbreak, Zhou posted a postdoctoral recruitment notice looking for one or two candidates to study the "unique mechanism of innate immunity in bats." In it, according to a translation done by The Daily Telegraph, Zhou offered the opportunity for "academic exchanges and research at home and abroad".

The CSIRO and the Australian Animal Health Laboratory have collaborated with China in numerous jointly-funded research projects into bat diseases, with scientists travelling back and forth between the two laboratories.

WARNINGS ON LAB The research into bats and coronaviruses at the Wuhan Institute of Virology has been considered high-risk amid concerns about the practices at the laboratory.

A "Sensitive but Unclassified" cable, dated January 19, 2018, obtained by The Washington Post, revealed that US embassy scientists and diplomats in Beijing visited the laboratory and met with Zhengli.

They sent warnings back to Washington about inadequate safety practices and management weaknesses as it conducted research on coronaviruses from bats. According to the Post, the cable "warns that the lab's work on bat coronaviruses and their potential human transmission represented a risk of a new SARS-like pandemic".

"During interactions with scientists at the WIV laboratory, they noted the new lab has a serious shortage of appropriately trained technicians and investigators needed to safely operate this high-containment laboratory," the cable stated.

A CSIRO spokesman said it had partnered with China in "excellent research and development for over 40 years".

"While there is no current research on bats at ACDP, the suggestion bat research is dangerous without context … is misleading and irresponsible," he said. "Research into bats underpins much of our understanding of zoonotic diseases. CSIRO undertakes due diligence and takes security very seriously."

PROBE MUST OCCUR The US Ambassador to Australia, Arthur B. Culvahouse Jr. told The Daily Telegraph the origins of the outbreak need to be investigated, adding that the phone call between Donald Trump and Scott Morrison on April 22 showed there is "no daylight" between the US and Australia's position on a probe.

"I commend Foreign Minister (Marise) Payne and her call for a hard, dispassionate look at the origins of the epidemic," he said. "This isn't about pointing fingers. It is about what could have been done better to prevent the disease, communicate its existence and prevent it from becoming a global pandemic.

"Sadly, this won't be the last novel virus the world faces. To do better in the future, we will need to fully understand what happened in the past. I fully support (the) calls for transparency and accountability from (Australia)."

PART TWO TOMORROW: The cost of coronavirus

WHO'S WHO IN WUHAN PENG ZHOU Number two in the 'bat unit' at the Wuhan Institute of Virology. July 2011 until July 2014: Worked at the Australian Animal Health Laboratory and Biosecurity Business Unit.

* Zhou was sent to the Australian Animal Health Laboratory and Biosecurity Business Unit by China to complete doctorate.

* At the Unit he arranged for wild-caught bats to be moved alive from southern Queensland to Victoria where they were euthanised and studied.

* This work was funded jointly by the CSIRO and the Chinese Academy of Sciences. * The research was designed to prevent a pandemic by understanding how viruses can be transmitted from bats to humans to cause coronaviruses.

SHI ZHENGLI Director of the Centre for Emerging Infectious Diseases at the Chinese Academy of Sciences' Wuhan Institute of Virology.

February 22 - May 21, 2006: Visiting scientist in Australia working at the CSIRO's top-level Australian Animal Health Laboratory.

* At the CSIRO she used faecal samples of horseshoe bats to identify that they were a natural host for SARS-like coronavirus.

* When COVID-19 broke out in Wuhan she worried it was released from her laboratory but has since strongly denied this occurred.

November 18 2019 Zhou posted a postdoctoral requirements notice looking for candidates to study the "unique mechanism of innate immunity in bats" - offering academic exchanges and research at home and abroad.* The United States embassy scientists and diplomats met Zhengli at the laboratory and sent warnings back to Washington, dated January 19 2018, about inadequate safety practices for research being conducted on bats.
---
Why it was more important to demonise anyone who agreed with Donald Trump's theory the virus came from a lab than to actually investigate whether he was right

Wait a second, this wasn't supposed to happen. We were all supposed to believe that the COVID-19 pandemic just sort of happened when someone slaughtered the wrong -animal too close to some other animal in Wuhan's notoriously gruesome "wet markets".

The idea that it may have been cooked up in a lab, even for legitimate purposes? The stuff of internet -loonies, we were told.

Yet how things change.

Evidence is now building that in fact the coronavirus was cooked up in the Wuhan Institute of Virology, with the idea now being endorsed by US deputy national security adviser -Michael Pottinger saying that there was "a growing body of evidence that the lab is likely the most credible source of the virus" - and that in -Beijing, "even establishment figures … have openly dismissed the wet market story".

This lends credence to the theory that the virus may have been created at the lab as part of legitimate scientific research that aims to cut up and recombine viruses in what are known as "gain of function" experiments -designed to predict how viruses might evolve - and thus better counter their threat should that occur.

But it's dangerous work. In 2014 a paper by scientists at Johns Hopkins University in the US called for a moratorium on such experiments, saying that "research that aims to create new potential pandemic pathogens … poses extraordinary potential risks to the public." You don't say.

Now, like the credibility of doctors who used to advertise cigarettes, the preferred media narrative that no way could the coronavirus have slipped through the gates at the Wuhan -Institute of Virology is falling apart.

And it hasn't been helped by China's response, blocking a World Health Organisation team from landing in Wuhan to investigate the pandemic's origins.

As the possibility that the pandemic is China's own Chernobyl, it's worthwhile looking back at just how this theory of COVID-19's origins has been dealt with in the leftist media.

After all, the idea that the virus -escaped some lab where these things were being tinkered with, for whatever purpose, was popular with Trump and his supporters, making it automatically suspect.

Recall that before the latest round of trade sanctions and social media attacks, hawkishness on China was seen as a thing for the sabre-rattling right.

For the respectable left, it was far better to treat the coronavirus as the natural but unfortunate outcome of Wuhan's exotic local food scene and make anyone who said otherwise out to be a war-hawk or a pariah.

To blame the communist state which, after all, was supposed to make us all wealthy while providing a counterbalance to a blustering America was unthinkable.

The ABC, naturally, led the charge to depict those who thought something fishy (or even batty, pardon the pun) was going on at the Wuhan -Institute of Virology as a swivel-eyed lunatic or, even worse, a Trump supporter. "Coronavirus may have come from a Chinese lab, if you believe -Donald Trump - but experts disagree", sneered the headline on a piece by reporter Alan Weedon on April 18 of last year.

Ah yes, where would we be without "experts"?

A month later, after Sharri Mark-son reported for the The Daily Telegraph that a US State Department dossier suggested links between the coronavirus outbreak and the Chinese facility, the ABC again swept into action to shoot the story down.

"The document contained no new evidence linking the laboratory to the outbreak and instead relied on publicly available news and scientific journal papers," the ABC's Dylan Welch wrote.

Not to be outdone, the ABC's Media Watch did not one but two hit pieces, one week apart, slamming the story as a "conspiracy theory" and -citing condemnations of the reporting by everyone from Gareth Evans to Bob Carr.

The same pattern was repeated in leftward-listing newsrooms around the world where for the past four years Donald Trump has been Enemy Number One.

The Los Angeles Times told readers in May that "Like the virus whose origin it purports to explain, the following conjecture refuses to die: The novel coronavirus was cooked up in a Chinese lab." A Washington Post "fact check" (yes, really) that same month looked at the question "Was the Wuhan coronavirus accidentally released from a Wuhan lab?" and came up with the answer "It's doubtful".

This, as they say, is not journalism. It's activism in plain sight, stemming from the simple equation that has governed so much of the news cycle for the past four years: If Trump says X, then not only must that X be false, it also must be driven into the ground and the earth above it salted so that nothing ever grows there again.

And it is pretty rich to see the ABC of all outlets getting all high and mighty about "conspiracy theories".

Recall that the billion-dollar broadcaster spent wheelbarrows of cash pushing the greatest conspiracy theory of all (still taken as an article of faith by many on the left), namely, that Donald Trump was somehow an agent of Moscow.

This saw taxpayers fork out for everything from the "Russia, Are You Listening?" podcast to special three-part Four Corners humbly titled, "The Story of the Century".

The great irony, of course, is that those on the left love to pride themselves on listening to facts and -experts and what is pretentiously known as "the science", while at the same time judging every piece of information's worth by whether or not it serves their narrative.

There is nothing political about a lab accident; they might happen anywhere scientists are working with these sorts of viruses. But there something deeply political, to say nothing of incredibly dangerous, about dismissing that possibility simply because it might vindicate the US president.
---
Government dossier claims incurable virus invented at lab with links to Australia EXPLOSIVE DOSSIER THE Australian government trained and employed a team of Chinese scientists - now the subject of a probe into the origins of COVID-19 - who went on to genetically modify deadly coronaviruses that could be transmitted from bats to humans and had no cure.

As intelligence agencies investigate whether the virus inadvertently leaked from a Wuhan laboratory, the team and its research led by scientist Shi Zhengli feature in a dossier prepared by Western governments that points to several studies they conducted as areas of concern.

It cites their work discovering samples of coronavirus from a cave in the Yunnan province with striking genetic similarity to COVID-19, along with their research synthesising a bat-derived coronavirus that could not be treated.

The 15-page research paper, obtained by The Saturday Telegraph, lays the foundation for the cover-up case being mounted by Western governments against China, stating that it deliberately engaged in the "suppression and destruction of evidence", in an "assault on international transparency" and to the "endangerment of other countries".

Its major themes include the "deadly denial of human-to-human transmission", the silencing or "disappearing" of doctors and scientists who spoke out, the destruction of evidence from Wuhan laboratories, and "bleaching of wildlife market stalls" along with the refusal to provide live virus samples to international scientists working on a vaccine.

Key figures of the Wuhan Institute of Virology team, who feature in the government dossier, were either trained or employed in the CSIRO's Australian Animal Health Laboratory where they conducted foundational research on deadly pathogens in live bats including SARS, as part of an ongoing partnership between the CSIRO and the Chinese Academy of Sciences.

This partnership continues to this day, according to the website of the Wuhan -Institute of Virology, despite concerns the research is too risky.

Politicians in the Morrison government are speaking out about the national security and biosecurity concerns of this relationship as the controversial research into bat-related viruses now comes into sharp focus amid the investigation by the Five Eyes intelligence agencies of the United States, Australia, NZ, Canada and the UK.

RISKY BAT RESEARCH In Wuhan, in China's Hubei province, not far from the now infamous Wuhan wet market, Ms Shi and her team work in high-protective gear in level-three and level-four bio-containment laboratories studying deadly batlike coronaviruses.

At least one of the -estimated 50 virus samples Shi has in her laboratory is a 96 per cent genetic match to COVID-19. When Ms Shi heard the news about the outbreak of a new pneumonia-like virus, she spoke about the sleepless nights she suffered worrying whether it was her lab that was responsible for the outbreak.

As she told Scientific American magazine in an article published this week: "Could they have come from our lab?" Since her initial fears, Shi has satisfied herself the genetic sequence of COVID-19 did not match any her lab was studying. Yet, given the extent of the People's Republic of China's lies, obfuscations and angry refusal to allow any investigation into the origin of the outbreak, her laboratory is now being closely looked at by international intelligence agencies.

The Australian government's position is the virus most likely originated in the Wuhan wet market but that there is a remote possibility - a 5 per cent chance - it accidentally leaked from a laboratory.

The US's position, according to reports this week, is that it is more likely the virus leaked from a laboratory but it could also have come from a wet market that trades and slaughters wild animals, where other diseases including the H5N1 avian flu and SARS originated from.

CREATING MORE DEADLY VIRUSES The Western governments' research paper, obtained by The Telegraph, confirms this. It notes a 2013 study conducted by a team of researchers including Ms Shi who collected a sample of horseshoe bat faeces from a cave in Yunnan province, China, which was later found to contain a virus 96.2 per cent identical to SARS-CoV-2, the virus that caused COVID-19.

The research dossier also references work done by the team to synthesise SARS-like coronaviruses, to analyse whether they could be transmissible from bats to mammals. This means they were altering parts of the virus to test whether it was transmissible to different species.

Their November 2015 study, done in conjunction with the University of North Carolina, concluded that the SARS-like virus could jump directly from bats to humans and there was no treatment that could help.

The study acknowledges the incredible danger of the work they were conducting. "The potential to prepare for and mitigate future outbreaks must be weighed against the risk of creating more dangerous pathogens," they wrote.

You have to be a scientist to understand it, but below is the line that the governments' research paper references from the study.

"To examine the emergence potential (that is, the potential to infect humans) of circulating bat CoVs, we built a chimeric virus encoding a novel, zoonotic CoV spike protein - from the RsSHCO14-CoV sequence that was isolated from Chinese horseshoe bats - in the context of the SARS-CoV mouse-adapted backbone," the study states.

One of Shi's co-authors on this paper, Ralph Baric from North Carolina University said in an interview with Science Daily at the time: "This virus is highly pathogenic and treatments developed against the original SARS virus in 2002 and the ZMapp drugs used to fight ebola fail to neutralise and control this particular virus." A few years later, in March 2019, Ms Shi and her team, including Peng Zhou, who worked in Australia for five years, published a review -titled Bat Coronaviruses in China in the medical journal Viruses where they wrote that they "aim to predict virus hotspots and their cross-species transmission potential" describing it as a matter of "urgency to study bat corona-viruses in China to understand their potential of causing another outbreak. Their review stated: "It is highly likely that future SARS or MERS like coronavirus outbreaks will originate from bats, and there is an increased probability that this will occur in China." It examined which proteins were "important for interspecies transmission". Despite intelligence probes into whether her laboratory may have been responsible for the outbreak, Ms Shi is not hitting pause on her research which she argues is more important than ever in preventing a pandemic. She plans to head a national project to systemically sample viruses in bat caves, with estimates that there are more than 5000 coronavirus strains "waiting to be discovered in bats globally".

"Bat-borne coronaviruses will cause more outbreaks," she told Scientific American. "We must find them before they find us."

AUSTRALIA'S INVOLVEMENT Ms Shi, the director of the Centre for Emerging Infectious Diseases at the Chinese Academy of Sciences' Wuhan Institute of Virology, spent time in Australia as a -visiting scientist for three months from February 22 to May 21, 2006 where she worked at the CSIRO's top-level Australian Animal Health Laboratory, which has recently been -renamed.

The CSIRO would not comment on what work she undertook during her time here, but according to an archived and translated biography on the Wuhan Institute of Virology website it stated that she was working with the SARS virus.

"The SARS virus antibodies and genes were tested in the State Key Laboratory of Virology in Wuhan and the Animal Health Research Laboratory in Geelong, Australia," it states.

The Telegraph has obtained two photographs of her working at the CSIRO laboratories, including in the level-four lab, in 2006.

Ms Shi's protégé, Peng Zhou - now the head of the Bat Virus Infection and Immunity Project at the Wuhan Institute of Virology - spent three years at the bio-containment facility Australian Animal Health Laboratory between 2011 and 2014. He was sent by China to complete his doctorate at the CSIRO from 2009-2010.

During this time, Mr Zhou arranged for wild-caught bats to be transported alive by air from Queensland to the lab in Victoria where they were euthanised for dissection and studied for deadly viruses.

Dr Linfa Wang, while an Honorary Professor of the Wuhan Institute of Virology between 2005 and 2011, also worked in the CSIRO Office of the Chief Executive Science Leader in Virology between 2008 and 2011.

Federal Liberal senator Sarah Henderson said it was "very concerning" that Chinese scientists had been conducting research into bat viruses at the CSIRO in Geelong, Victoria, in jointly funded projects between the Australian and Chinese governments.

"We need to exercise extreme care with any research projects involving foreign nationals which may compromise our national security or biosecurity," she said.

While the US has cut all funding to the Wuhan Institute of Virology, the CSIRO would not respond to -questions about whether it is still collaborating with it, saying only that it collaborates with research organisations from around the world to prevent diseases.

"As with all partners, CSIRO undertakes due diligence and takes security very seriously," a spokesman said. "CSIRO undertakes all research in accordance with strict biosecurity and legislative requirements."

IS THE RESEARCH WORTH THE RISK?

The US withdrew funding from controversial experiments that make pathogens more potent or likely to spread dangerous viruses in October 2014, concerned it could lead to a global pandemic. The pause on funding for 21 "gain of function" studies was then lifted in December 2017.

Despite the concerns, the CSIRO continued to partner and fund research with the Wuhan Institute of Virology.

The CSIRO refused to respond to questions from The Saturday Telegraph about how much money went into joint research collaboration with the Chinese Academy of Science and its Wuhan Institute of Virology. The Wuhan Institute still lists the CSIRO as a partner while the US has cut ties since the coronavirus outbreak.

The argument is whether it is worth developing these viruses to anticipate and prevent a pandemic when a leak of the virus could also cause one. Debate in the scientific community is heated.

There have also been serious concerns about a lack of adequate safety practices at the Wuhan Institute of Virology when dealing with deadly viruses.

A "Sensitive but Unclassified" cable, dated January 19, 2018, obtained by The Washington Post, revealed that US embassy scientists and diplomats in Beijing visited the laboratory and sent warnings back to Washington about inadequate safety practices and management weaknesses as it conducted research on coronaviruses from bats.

"During interactions with scientists at the WIV laboratory, they noted the new lab has a serious shortage of -appropriately trained technicians and investigators needed to safely operate this high-containment laboratory," the cable stated.

UNLIKELY CLAIMS VIRUS CREATED IN LAB Scientific consensus is that the virus came from a wet market. But the US's top spy agency confirmed on the record for the first time yesterday that the US intelligence committee is investigating whether COVID-19 was the result of an accident at a Wuhan laboratory.

The Office of the Director of National Intelligence acting director Richard Grenell said the virus was not created in a laboratory.

"The entire Intelligence Community has been consistently providing critical support to US policymakers and those responding to the COVID-19 virus, which originated in China," he said.

"The Intelligence Community also concurs with the wide scientific consensus that the COVID-19 virus was not man-made or genetically modified. As we do in all crises, the Community's experts respond by surging resources and producing critical intelligence on issues vital to US national security. The IC will continue to rigorously examine emerging information and intelligence to determine whether the outbreak began through contact with infected animals or if it was the result of an accident at a laboratory in Wuhan." Despite Mr Grenell's statement and scientific consensus that the virus was not created in a laboratory, based on its genome sequence, the governments' research paper obtained by The Telegraph notes a study that claims it was created.

South China University of Technology researchers published a study on February 6 that concluded "the killer coronavirus probably originated from a laboratory in Wuhan. Safety level may need to be reinforced in high-risk biohazards laboratories".

"The paper is soon withdrawn because it 'was not supported by direct proofs', according to author Botao Xiano," the dossier noted, continuing to point out that: '"No scientists have confirmed or refuted the paper's findings', scholar Yanzhong Huang wrote on March 5." The Saturday Telegraph does not claim that the South China University of Technology study is credible, only that it has been included in this government research paper produced as part of the case against China.

CHINA'S COVER-UP OF EARLY SAMPLES The paper obtained by The Saturday Telegraph speaks about "the suppression and destruction of evidence" and points to "virus samples ordered destroyed at genomics labs, wildlife market stalls bleached, the genome sequence not shared publicly, the Shanghai lab closure for 'rectification', academic articles subjected to prior review by the Ministry of Science and Technology and data on asymptomatic 'silent carriers' kept secret".

It paints a picture of how the Chinese government deliberately covered up the coronavirus by silencing doctors who spoke out, destroying evidence from the Wuhan laboratory and refusing to provide live virus samples to international scientists working on a vaccine.

The US, along with other countries, has repeatedly -demanded a live virus sample from the first batch of cases. This is understood to have not been forthcoming despite its vital importance in developing a vaccine while potentially providing an indication of where the virus originated.

THE LAB WORKER WHO DISAPPEARED Out of all the doctors, activists, journalists and scientists who have reportedly disappeared after speaking out about the coronavirus or criticising the response of Chinese authorities, no case is more intriguing and worrying than that of Huang Yan Ling.

A researcher at the Wuhan Institute of Virology, the South China Morning Post reported rumours swirling on Chinese social media that she was the first to be diagnosed with the disease and was -"patient zero".

Then came her reported disappearance, with her biography and image deleted from the Wuhan Institute of Virology's website. On February 16 the Wuhan Institute of Virology denied she was -patient zero and said she was alive and well, but there has been no proof of life since then, fanning speculation.

DESTRUCTION OF EVIDENCE On December 31, Chinese authorities started censoring news of the virus from search engines, deleting terms including "SARS variation", "Wuhan seafood market" and "Wuhan unknown pneumonia".

On January 1 without any investigation into where the virus originated from, the Wuhan seafood market was closed and disinfected.

It has been reported in the New York Times that individual animals and cages were not swabbed "eliminating evidence of what animal might have been the source of the coronavirus and which people had become infected but survived". The Hubei health commission ordered genomics companies to stop testing for the new virus and to destroy all samples. A day later, on January 3, China's leading health authority, the National Health Commission, ordered Wuhan pneumonia samples be moved to designated testing facilities or destroyed, while instructing a no-publication order related to the unknown disease.

Doctors who bravely spoke out about the new virus were detained and condemned. Their detentions were splashed across the Chinese state media with a call from Wuhan police for "all citizens to not fabricate rumours, not spread rumours, not believe rumours".

A tweet from the Global Times on January 2 states: "Police in Central China's Wuhan arrested 8 people spreading rumours about local outbreak of unidentifiable #pneumonia. Previous online posts said it was SARS." This had the intended effect of silencing other doctors who may have been inclined to speak out.

So the truth about the outbreak in China has remained shrouded in secrecy, with President Xi Jinping aggressively rejecting global calls for an inquiry.

KEY DATES IN COVID COVER-UP November 9, 2015 Wuhan Institute of Virology publish a study revealing they created a new virus in the lab from SARS-CoV.

December 6, 2019 Five days after a man linked to Wuhan's seafood market presented pneumonia-like symptoms, his wife contracts it, suggesting human to human transmission.

December 27 China's health authorities told a novel disease, then affecting some 180 patients, was caused by a new coronavirus.

December 26-30 Evidence of new virus emerges from Wuhan patient data.

December 31 Chinese internet authorities begin censoring terms from social media such as Wuhan Unknown Pneumonia.

January 1, 2020 Eight Wuhan doctors who warned about new virus are detained and condemned. January 3 China's top health authority issues a gag order.

January 5 Wuhan Municipal Health Commission stops releasing daily updates on new cases. Continues until January 18.

January 10 PRC official Wang Guangfa says outbreak "under control" and mostly a "mild condition".

January 12 Professor Zhang Yongzhen's lab in Shanghai is closed by authorities for "rectification", one day after it shares genomic sequence data with the world for the first time.

January 14 PRC National Health Commission chief Ma Xiaowei privately warns colleagues the virus is likely to develop into a major public health event.

January 24 Officials in Beijing prevent the Wuhan Institute of Virology from sharing sample isolates with the University of Texas.

February 6 China's internet watchdog tightens controls on social media platforms. February 9 Citizen-journalist and local businessman Fang Bin disappears. april 17Wuhan belatedly raises its official fatalities by 1290.
---
When we speak of security in terms of biological research, most -people assume this to mean security surrounding laboratories and the like.

In a time of great concern over the source of the COVID-19 virus that has now infected more than 3.7 million people and killed close to 260,000, that is certainly a very legitimate assumption.

This is especially so given that China has undertaken substantial research into bat--related viruses - and that an amount of that research -occurred in partnership with Australia's CSIRO.

But an equally great security concern is political.

A laboratory may be perfectly sealed and sterile, but the information gathered within those protected facilities must also be safely locked down.

That issue now prompts Morrison government Senators, Matt Canavan, Sarah Henderson and Jim Molan to propose a federal oversight agency to -ensure there is no foreign interference in Australia's science and research sector.

"There are credible claims that China has sought to abuse our open and free academic -environment to further their strategic goals," Senator Canavan points out "There is a national interest in protecting the security of our high-level research." Senator Henderson is of like mind. "A federal agency to regulate research by foreign nat-ionals would be an important way of combating foreign interference," she said.

The requirement for such an authority becomes even more obvious following exclusive revelations in The Daily Telegraph of professional ties between a scientist employed by China's People's Liberation Army and the director of Australia's Animal Health Laboratory - -recently renamed the Centre for Disease Preparedness.

The Daily Telegraph does not suggest any wrongdoing by any party in this specific instance. We simply point out the professional connections.

Dr Tu Changchun of the PLA's Academy of Military Medical Sciences has a fascinating background in coronavirus research and also happens to sit on the board of the Wuhan -Institute of Virology's scientific advisory committee.The Institute, of course, is now at the centre of the global probe into COVID-19's origins.
---
THE World Health Organisation has found it "impossible" to trace the origins of COVID-19 despite a 28-day investigation in Wuhan, dismissing suggestions it was leaked from a lab or crossed to humans at a seafood market.

The team handed down their findings at a press conference in Wuhan late yesterday, after a month of meetings and site visits in the Chinese city where the virus was first identified in December 2019.

WHO scientists, appearing alongside their Chinese counterparts, said the most likely possibility was that the virus spilled over from an animal into humans. Frozen food was also being probed as a potential source.

Peter Ben Embarek, the head of the WHO mission, said: "The laboratory incident hypothesis is extremely unlikely to explain the introduction of the virus into the human population." Dr Embarek said the WHO investigation had uncovered new information but had not dramatically changed the picture of the outbreak.

Professor Liang Wannian, who heads the Chinese team of experts, ruled out the Huanan Seafood Market as an origin source.

"While some of the early cases had an association with the Huanan seafood market, others were associated with another market and some no market at all," Prof Liang said.

He said the team believed the virus originated in animals - likely bats or pangolins - but the intermediate hosts that allowed it to jump to humans are "yet to be identified".

Prof Liang said minks and cats were also potential virus reservoirs but he said there was "not adequate enough" research proving this.

He also said no bats in the wild in China had been found to be carrying viruses that may have mutated into COVID-19.

The virus could have been circulating in other regions before it was identified in the central Chinese city of Wuhan at the end of 2019, he said.

The WHO team agreed with his assessment, with Dr Embarek adding: "We can also agree we have found evidence of wider circulation in December not just cluster outbreak in market, also circulated outside market."

KEY FINDINGS ■ Lab theory 'extremely unlikely'

■ Huanan Seafood Market unlikely to be original source of outbreak

■ Frozen food is being probed as a potential carrier of the virus ■ Study points to virus originating in bats - but it is unlikely they were in Wuhan
---
Some sections of the media actually believe criticism of China is support for Trump

Virtually every statement Chinese authorities have made about coronavirus has been an outright lie.

China, echoed by the World Health Organisation, claimed the virus was "preventable and -controllable". They claimed there was no evidence of human-to-human transmission.

Activists and doctors who sounded the alarm about a new virus vanished or were arrested, and the lucky ones were punished with their faces splashed across the evening news in shame for allegedly spreading false information.

Genomics companies were ordered to destroy samples of the virus and testing of new cases of coronavirus was stopped entirely for a week in early January while Chinese internet authorities censored social media search terms like "SARS variation" and "Wuhan unknown pneumonia".

Even as hundreds and then -thousands become sick and the death toll rose, Chinese authorities continued to insist there was no evidence the new disease would spread widely and condemned travel restrictions from China.

Given there has been blatant -disinformation at every step of the way from the PRC, why is the world so quick to believe its story from early on in the piece, before any -investigations had taken place, that the coronavirus originated in the Wuhan seafood market?

Viruses have a long history of emerging from unhygienic wet -markets where live animals are slaughtered and even if the coronavirus didn't come from the wet market this time, there is cause for them to be shut down.

It is, as Scott Morrison repeatedly says, the most likely source of the -outbreak.

But it also needs to be confirmed.

If it came from a wet market, we need to know this to continue to strongly call for their closure or clean-up.

If it came from a Wuhan -laboratory, we need to know this to have a debate about whether "gain of function" research is worth the risk.

According to US embassy officials and scientists who visited the Wuhan Institute of Virology in 2018, there were serious concerns about safety practices and management weaknesses.

There have been also been several accidental laboratory leaks - even of SARS - and it is entirely possible this happened again.

The famous 'bat woman', Shi Zhengli, from the Wuhan Institute of Virology, even produced a -November 2015 joint-study that spoke of the incredible risk of the work she was doing.

"The potential to prepare for and mitigate future outbreaks must be weighed against the risk of creating more dangerous pathogens," the study states.

"Gain of function" research is such a heated area of scientific debate that the Obama administration withdrew funding from this type of research in 2014.

As Shi Zhengli said herself in -interviews, she was worried it was one of the viruses from her lab when she learnt of an outbreak, until -studying the genetic sequencing.

But, when every statement -Chinese authorities have issued in -relation to this virus has been -inaccurate, it is right that a global -investigation takes place into the -origins of the virus.

Yet, in the media and for some on the left, it's a case of your enemy's enemy is your friend.

They confuse criticism of the Chinese regime's response to COVID-19 with support for Trump.

The Trump administration was far too slow to understand the scale of the pandemic, unlike the Australian government, and the US death toll -reflects that.

Nine newspapers were left -embarrassed this week when less than a day after they posted a front-page story downplaying the inquiry into whether the virus accidentally leaked from a laboratory, the US's top spy released a rare statement -confirming this was at the heart of the investigation by intelligence agencies.

Just as I was making this point in my column, as if to prove its merit, questions have lobbed from the ABC's Media Watch!

Why did I not mention the Morrison government's view there was only a 5 per cent chance the virus leaked from a laboratory? Why did I not tell readers the bat virus being worked on by Shi Zhengli was not the same genetically as coronavirus and why did I not tell readers the overwhelming verdict from scientists is that the virus did not escape a lab?

If Paul Barry was an avid reader of The Daily Telegraph, he would know I broke the 5 per cent figure two weeks ago and that I mention -Morrison's view it was unlikely the virus originated in a lab in every single story.

Even worse for Media Watch, they seem not to be aware that Shi Zhengli has worked with dozens of viruses - not just one - and plans to map as many of the estimated 5000 coronaviruses from bats as she can.

And, finally, my story they are querying me on was not actually about the origins of the virus. It was about how the scientists at the centre of the global investigation studied bats in Australia.

Knowing how excited Tim Blair gets by Media Watch questions, my editor Ben English flicked them on to him.

Blair has helpfully offered a punchy intro for the program: "Hello. I'm Paul Barry, and welcome to Media Watch.

"It was billed by The Daily -Telegraph as a 'world exclusive', but was it? "Yes. It was.

"Next on Media Watch, the inside story of a television fat cat who is still on a $200,000 taxpayer-funded salary for presenting just 15 minutes of TV per week - while millions of -Australians are out of work or living on reduced pay." I digress, and now my column about China's lack of transparency over COVID-19 is over.Aah. Media Watch and the left win after all.
---
ADVICE to the Morrison government as early as February suggested that COVID-19 may have been an inadvertent leak from a Wuhan laboratory, three senior federal sources have confirmed.

The Daily Telegraph can reveal in the early days of the outbreak the probability was initially placed at around 50 per cent that COVID-19 was accidentally released from a bio-containment facility but this was swiftly downgraded to a five per cent chance as more became known about the virus.

Responding to The Daily Telegraph's revelations that Five Eyes intelligence agencies were looking at the Wuhan Institute of Virology after it was revealed two senior scientists had worked in Australia studying live bats, Health Minister Greg Hunt said the reason Australia wanted a review was to understand "exactly" how the coronavirus started.

"We want a clear, independent, fearless global review of the origins, the actions, and the global path forward, in relation to this and all future pandemics," he said.

In the upper echelons of the Morrison government it is now considered unlikely the naturally-occurring, highly-infectious coronavirus came from a laboratory but that further investigations are required to advance world knowledge and prevent future pandemics.

Home Affairs Minister Peter Dutton said while he could not comment on the Telegraph's report that senior Wuhan Institute of Virology scientists Peng Zhou and Shi Zhengli studied bats at the CSIRO's Australian Animal Health Laboratory, he said: "Obviously, ASIO and our agencies do a lot of work with their international counterparts, particularly the Five Eyes community. We've looked at a number of cases, particularly over the last couple of years," he said. "But it's not something I'd comment on in terms of the investigation." Mr Zhou - the head of the Bat Virus Infection and Immunity Project at the Wuhan Institute of Virology - spent three years at the bio-containment facility Australian Animal Health Laboratory between 2011 and 2014.

The other scientist whose work is being looked at is Ms Zhengli, who is the director of the Centre for Emerging Infectious Diseases at the Chinese Academy of Sciences' Wuhan Institute of Virology. She also spent time in Australia in 2006 at the Animal Health Laboratory.When the COVID-19 outbreak occurred in Wuhan, Ms Zhengli said she had sleepless nights worrying whether it was released from her laboratory but has since strongly denied this occurred. The Daily Telegraph does not suggest the two scientists are responsible for the outbreak or spread of COVID-19, but merely that they have come to the attention of intelligence agencies.
---
WORLD EXCLUSIVE Government dossier reveals virus cover-up

THE Australian government trained and employed a team of Chinese scientists, whose laboratory is now the subject of a probe into the origins of COVID-19.

The laboratory genetically modified deadly coronaviruses that could be transmitted from bats to humans, causing illness that had no cure.

A dossier compiled by Western governments and obtained by The Saturday Telegraph features the Wuhan lab now at the centre of intelligence agencies' investigations to determine if an accidental release caused the coronavirus pandemic.

The laboratory, led by scientist Shi Zhengli, and its research feature in the dossier, which points to several studies they conducted as areas of concern.

It cites the lab's work discovering samples of coronavirus from a bat cave in China with a striking genetic similarity to COVID-19, along with research synthesising a bat-derived coronavirus that could not be treated.

The document lays the foundation for accusing China of a general cover-up, stating it deliberately engaged in the "suppression and destruction of evidence", in an "assault on international transparency" and to the "endangerment- of other countries".SPECIAL REPORT PAGES 6-9
---
EXCLUSIVE Intel agencies uneasy about US virus theory

THE Australian government and its intelligence agencies are understood to be growing increasingly uneasy with the US President's bold claims COVID-19 probably leaked from a Wuhan laboratory.

The origins of coronavirus, and whether it inadvertently leaked from the Wuhan Institute of Virology, is the subject of an investigation by the Five Eyes Intelligence agencies of Australia, New Zealand, Canada, US and UK.

The Daily Telegraph understands the central concern emerging from the Australian government and its security- agencies is that the US may be putting undue emphasis on the theory the virus originated in a Wuhan laboratory.

In an extraordinary comparison, one senior federal source said there were emerging fears in the intelligence community that the US administration could be repeating mistakes made by George Bush and Tony Blair when they pressured the UN weapons inspector to declare Saddam- Hussein possessed weapons of mass destruction.

In recent days the lab-leak line of inquiry has been promoted as the most likely cause of the outbreak by US President Donald Trump and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, who said there was "a significant amount of evidence" to support it.

The Daily Telegraph understands Australia has seen all of the evidence the US possesses under the intelligence sharing arrangement and there is nothing yet to strongly suggest the naturally-occurring virus came out of the laboratory rather than the wet market. This has led to unrest within Australian intelligence agencies.

The ultimate goal of both the Australian and US governments is the same; seeing China held accountable for its negligence and cover-up of the outbreak which has cost tens of thousands of lives around the world.

On Saturday, The Daily Telegraph published a dossier compiled by concerned Western governments that lays out the case against China over its "suppression and destruction of evidence", its "deadly denial of human-to-human transmission" and its "assault on international transparency" as it sought to cover-up the coronavirus contagion.

While the end-goal of holding China accountable is consistent, the schism between the US executives' position on China's culpability for the outbreak and the Australian intelligence agencies has put Scott Morrison in an awkward position.

The Australian government's official- position is that COVID-19 most likely originated in a wet market and there is a 5 per cent chance it was born as a result of an accident in the Wuhan Institute of Virology.

Mr Morrison is taking a more nuanced- approach than the US that avoids direct accusations against China as he seeks to build consensus for an inquiry at the World Health Assembly in Geneva next month.

The Prime Minister wrote to the G20 nations on Monday, pitching a review into the pandemic response.

"What's really important is that we have a proper review, an independent review, which looks into the sources of these things in a transparent way so we can learn," he said.It is understood Mr Morrison does not want to publicly undermine comments- made by either Mr Trump or Mr Pompeo, with whom the Prime Minister has a particularly good rapport-. In recent days Mr Trump said he has seen evidence that he was not allowed to share which supported the theory the coronavirus was an accidental- leak from a facility in Wuhan, where there have been concerns about safety practices.
---
THE coronavirus that has become a worldwide pandemic may have been created in a "cell-culture experiment" in a laboratory, according to prominent scientists who have conducted groundbreaking research into the origins of the virus.

Flinders University -Professor Nikolai Petrovsky has completed a scientific study, currently undergoing peer review, in conjunction with Latrobe University in Victoria, which found COVID-19 was uniquely adapted for transmission to humans, far more than any other animal, including bats.

"It was like it was -designed to infect humans," he said.

Professor Petrovsky, from the College of Medicine and Public Health at Flinders University, who has spent the past 20 years developing vaccines against pandemic influenza, ebola and animal SARS, said this highly unusual finding left open the possibility that the virus leaked from a laboratory.

CONTINUES P8 CONTINUED FROM PAGE 1 "The two possibilities which I think are both still open is that it was a chance transmission of a virus from an as yet unidentified animal to human. The other possibility is that it was an accidental release of the virus from a laboratory," he said. "Certainly we can't exclude the possibility that this came from a laboratory experiment rather than from an animal. They are both open possibilities." Prof Petrovsky, who is chairman and research director of Vaccine Pty Ltd, said COVID-19 had genetic elements similar to bat coronaviruses as well as other coronaviruses.

The way coronavirus enters human cells is by binding to a protein on the surface of lung cells called ACE2. The study showed the virus bound more tightly to human-ACE2 than to any of the other animals they tested.

"One of the possibilities is that an animal host was infected by two coronaviruses at the same time and COVID-19 is the progeny of that -interaction between the two viruses.

"The same process can happen in a petri-dish. If you have cells in culture and you have human cells in that culture which the viruses are infecting, then if there are two viruses in that dish, they can swap genetic information and you can accidentally or deliberately create a whole third new virus out of that system.

"In other words COVID-19 could have been created from that recombination event in an animal host or it could have occurred in a cell-culture experiment." Scientists worldwide have, to date, overwhelmingly said the virus more likely originated in a wet-market and was not created in a laboratory.

Asked why scientists have had this view, Professor Petrovsky said scientists "try not to be political" and do not want their research impacted adversely by tighter laboratory controls.

Prof Petrovsky was originally modelling the virus in January to prepare a vaccine candidate. He then turned his attention to "explore what animal species might have been -involved in the transmission to humans" to understand the origins of the virus - and had a "surprising" -result when none were well-adapted.

"We found that the COVID-19 virus was particularly well-adapted to bind to human cells and that was far superior to its ability to bind to the cells of any other animal species, which is quite unusual because typically when a virus is well-adapted to an animal and then it by chance crosses to a human, typically, you would expect it to have lower-binding to human cells than to the original host animal.

"We found the opposite so that was a big surprise," he said. The study, a collaboration between Flinders University and Latrobe University, titled "In Silico comparison of spike protein-ACE2 binding affinities across species; significance for the possible origin of SARS-CoV-2 virus", is awaiting peer-review.
---
THE COVID FILES VIRUS ORIGINS TWO Chinese scientists - who western intelligence agencies are looking into as part of their probe into the origins of the global coronavirus contagion - studied live bats in Australia in research jointly funded by the Australian and Chinese governments.

An investigation by The Daily Telegraph can reveal the Five Eyes intelligence agencies of Australia, Canada, NZ, UK and US, are understood to be looking closely at the work of a senior scientist at the Wuhan Institute of Virology, Peng Zhou, as they examine whether COVID-19 originated from a wet market or whether the naturally--occurring virus may have been released from the level four laboratory in Wuhan that was studying deadly coronavirus pathogens from bats.

The revelation comes as Australian politicians ramp up pressure on China to co--operate with an international investigation into the origins of the COVID-19 outbreak.

Chair of the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security, Andrew Hastie said: "The Chinese Communist Party must take responsibility for the virus that began inside their borders and work with the rest of the world to prevent it from happening again. We are simply asking for transparency and co-operation." The Australian government's position is the virus most likely originated from the Wuhan wet markets but it is possible it was accidentally released from a laboratory.

It can be revealed that Zhou - the head of the Bat Virus Infection and Immunity Project at the Wuhan Institute of Virology - spent three years at the bio-containment facility, Australian Animal Health Laboratory between 2011 and 2014, where he was sent by China to complete his doctorate.

During this time, Zhou arranged for wild-caught bats to be transported alive by air from Queensland to the Australian Animal Health Laboratory in Victoria where they were euthanised for dissection and studied for deadly viruses.

His work was funded jointly by the CSIRO and the Chinese Academy of Sciences. It examined bat immunology and the role of interferons and how "bats are rich reservoirs for emerging viruses, including many that are highly pathogenic to humans and other mammals" and "many of which cause significant morbidity and mortality in humans and other mammals."

HIGHLY-RISKY WORK The research is designed to prevent the next pandemic by understanding how viruses can be transmitted from bats to humans to cause coronaviruses. But the work is considered highly-risky and there have been fears in recent years that any inadvertent leak could cause a worldwide pandemic.

The other scientist being looked at is Shi Zhengli, who is the director of the Centre for Emerging Infectious Diseases at the Chinese Academy of Sciences' Wuhan Institute of Virology. Zhengli also spent time in Australia as a visiting scientist for three months from February 22 to May 21, 2006 where she worked at the CSIRO's top-level Australian Animal Health Laboratory.

She used faecal samples of horseshoe bats to identify that they were the natural host for SARS-like coronaviruses.

When the COVID-19 outbreak occurred in Wuhan, Zhengli said she had sleepless nights worrying whether it was released from her laboratory - but has since strongly denied this occurred.

The Daily Telegraph does not suggest the two scientists are responsible for the outbreak or spread of COVID-19, but merely that they have come to the attention of intelligence agencies.

On November 18 last year, shortly before the outbreak, Zhou posted a postdoctoral recruitment notice looking for one or two candidates to study the "unique mechanism of innate immunity in bats." In it, according to a translation done by The Daily Telegraph, Zhou offered the opportunity for "academic exchanges and research at home and abroad".

The CSIRO and the Australian Animal Health Laboratory have collaborated with China in numerous jointly-funded research projects into bat diseases, with scientists travelling back and forth between the two laboratories.

WARNINGS ON LAB The research into bats and coronaviruses at the Wuhan Institute of Virology has been considered high-risk amid concerns about the practices at the laboratory.

A "Sensitive but Unclassified" cable, dated January 19, 2018, obtained by The Washington Post, revealed that US embassy scientists and diplomats in Beijing visited the laboratory and met with Zhengli.

They sent warnings back to Washington about inadequate safety practices and management weaknesses as it conducted research on coronaviruses from bats. According to the Post, the cable "warns that the lab's work on bat coronaviruses and their potential human transmission represented a risk of a new SARS-like pandemic".

"During interactions with scientists at the WIV laboratory, they noted the new lab has a serious shortage of appropriately trained technicians and investigators needed to safely operate this high-containment laboratory," the cable stated.

A CSIRO spokesman said it had partnered with China in "excellent research and development for over 40 years".

"While there is no current research on bats at ACDP, the suggestion bat research is dangerous without context … is misleading and irresponsible," he said. "Research into bats underpins much of our understanding of zoonotic diseases. CSIRO undertakes due diligence and takes security very seriously."

PROBE MUST OCCUR The US Ambassador to Australia, Arthur B. Culvahouse Jr. told The Daily Telegraph the origins of the outbreak need to be investigated, adding that the phone call between Donald Trump and Scott Morrison on April 22 showed there is "no daylight" between the US and Australia's position on a probe.

"I commend Foreign Minister (Marise) Payne and her call for a hard, dispassionate look at the origins of the epidemic," he said. "This isn't about pointing fingers. It is about what could have been done better to prevent the disease, communicate its existence and prevent it from becoming a global pandemic.

"Sadly, this won't be the last novel virus the world faces. To do better in the future, we will need to fully understand what happened in the past. I fully support (the) calls for transparency and accountability from (Australia)."

WHO'S WHO IN WUHAN Peng Zhou Number two in the 'bat unit'fat the Wuhan Institute off Virology. July 2011 until July 2014: Worked at the Australian Animal Health Laboratory and Biosecurity Business Unit.

Zhou was sent to the Australian Animal Health Laboratory and Biosecurity Business Unit by China to complete doctorate.

Shi Zhengli Director of the Centre for Emerging Infectious Diseases at the Chinese Academy of Sciences' Wuhan Institute of Virology.

February 22 - May 21, 2006: Visiting scientist in Australia working at the CSIRO's top-level Australian Animal Health Laboratory.

At the CSIRO she used faecal samples of horseshoe bats to identify that they were a natural host for SARS-like coronavirus.

When COVID-19 broke out in Wuhan she worried it was released from her laboratory but has since strongly denied this occurred.

November 18 2019 Zhou posted a postdoctoral requirements notice looking for candidates to study the "unique mechanism of innate immunity in bats" - offering academic exchanges and research at home and abroad.

The United States embassy scientists and diplomats met Zhengli at the laboratory and sent warnings back to Washington, dated January 19 2018, about inadequate safety practices for research being conducted on bats.

PART TWO TOMORROWThe cost of coronavirus
---
THE COVID FILES Government dossier claims incurable virus invented at lab with links to Australia

CHINA deliberately suppressed or destroyed evidence of the coronavirus outbreak in an "assault on international transparency" that cost tens of thousands of lives, according to a dossier prepared by concerned Western governments on the COVID-19 contagion.

The 15-page research document, obtained by The Saturday Telegraph, lays the foundation for the case of negligence being mounted against China.

It states that to the "endangerment of other countries" the Chinese government covered-up news of the virus by silencing or "disappearing" doctors who spoke out, destroying evidence of it in laboratories and refusing to provide live samples to international scientists who were working on a vaccine.

It can also be revealed the Australian government trained and funded a team of Chinese scientists who belong to a laboratory which went on to genetically modify deadly coronaviruses that could be transmitted from bats to humans and had no cure, and is not the subject of a probe into the origins of COVID-19.

As intelligence agencies investigate whether the virus inadvertently leaked from a Wuhan laboratory, the team and its research led by scientist Shi Zhengli feature in the dossier prepared by Western governments that points to several studies they conducted as areas of concern.

It cites their work discovering samples of coronavirus from a cave in the Yunnan province with striking genetic similarity to COVID-19, along with their research synthesising a bat-derived coronavirus that could not be treated.

Its major themes include the "deadly denial of human-to-human transmission", the silencing or "disappearing" of doctors and scientists who spoke out, the destruction of evidence of the virus from genomic studies laboratories, and "bleaching of wildlife market stalls", along with the refusal to provide live virus samples to international scientists working on a vaccine.

Key figures of the Wuhan Institute of Virology team, who feature in the government dossier, were either trained or employed in the CSIRO's Australian Animal Health Laboratory where they conducted foundational research on deadly pathogens in live bats, including SARS, as part of an ongoing partnership between the CSIRO and the Chinese Academy of Sciences.

This partnership continues to this day, according to the website of the Wuhan -Institute of Virology, despite concerns the research is too risky.

Politicians in the Morrison government are speaking out about the national security and biosecurity concerns of this relationship as the controversial research into bat-related viruses now comes into sharp focus amid the investigation by the Five Eyes intelligence agencies of the United States, Australia, NZ, Canada and the UK.

RISKY BAT RESEARCH In Wuhan, in China's Hubei province, not far from the now infamous Wuhan wet market, Dr Shi and her team work in high-protective gear in level-three and level-four bio-containment laboratories studying deadly bat-derived coronaviruses.

At least one of the -estimated 50 virus samples Dr Shi has in her laboratory is a 96 per cent genetic match to COVID-19. When Dr Shi heard the news about the outbreak of a new -pneumonia-like virus, she spoke about the sleepless nights she suffered worrying whether it was her lab that was responsible for the outbreak.

As she told Scientific American magazine in an article published this week: "Could they have come from our lab?" Since her initial fears, Dr Shi has satisfied herself the genetic sequence of COVID-19 did not match any her lab was studying.

Yet, given the extent of the People's Republic of China's lies, obfuscations and angry refusal to allow any investigation into the origin of the outbreak, her laboratory is now being closely looked at by international intelligence agencies.

The Australian government's position is that the virus most likely originated in the Wuhan wet market but that there is a remote possibility - a 5 per cent chance - it accidentally leaked from a laboratory.

The US's position, according to reports this week, is that it is more likely the virus leaked from a laboratory but it could also have come from a wet market that trades and slaughters wild animals, where other diseases including the H5N1 avian flu and SARS originated.

CREATING MORE DEADLY VIRUSES The Western governments' research paper confirms this.

It notes a 2013 study conducted by a team of researchers, including Dr Shi, who collected a sample of horseshoe bat faeces from a cave in Yunnan province, China, which was later found to contain a virus 96.2 per cent identical to SARS-CoV-2, the virus that caused COVID-19.

The research dossier also references work done by the team to synthesise SARS-like coronaviruses, to analyse whether they could be transmissible from bats to mammals. This means they were altering parts of the virus to test whether it was transmissible to different species.

Their November 2015 study, done in conjunction with the University of North Carolina, concluded that the SARS-like virus could jump directly from bats to humans and there was no treatment that could help.

The study acknowledges the incredible danger of the work they were conducting. "The potential to prepare for and mitigate future outbreaks must be weighed against the risk of creating more dangerous pathogens," they wrote.

You have to be a scientist to understand it, but below is the line that the governments' research paper references from the study.

"To examine the emergence potential (that is, the potential to infect humans) of circulating bat CoVs, we built a chimeric virus encoding a novel, zoonotic CoV spike protein - from the RsSHCO14-CoV sequence that was isolated from Chinese horseshoe bats - in the context of the SARS-CoV mouse-adapted backbone," the study states.

One of Dr Shi's co-authors on that paper, Professor Ralph Baric from North Carolina University, said in an interview with Science Daily at the time: "This virus is highly pathogenic and treatments developed against the original SARS virus in 2002 and the ZMapp drugs used to fight ebola fail to neutralise and control this particular virus." A few years later, in March 2019, Dr Shi and her team, including Peng Zhou, who worked in Australia for five years, published a review -titled Bat Coronaviruses in China in the medical journal Viruses, where they wrote that they "aim to predict virus hotspots and their cross-species transmission potential", describing it as a matter of "urgency to study bat corona-viruses in China to understand their potential of causing another outbreak. Their review stated: "It is highly likely that future SARS or MERS like coronavirus outbreaks will originate from bats, and there is an increased probability that this will occur in China." It examined which proteins were "important for interspecies transmission". Despite intelligence probes into whether her laboratory may have been responsible for the outbreak, Dr Shi is not hitting pause on her research, which she argues is more important than ever in preventing a pandemic. She plans to head a national project to systemically sample viruses in bat caves, with estimates that there are more than 5000 coronavirus strains "waiting to be discovered in bats globally".

"Bat-borne coronaviruses will cause more outbreaks," she told Scientific American. "We must find them before they find us."

AUSTRALIA'S INVOLVEMENT Dr Shi, the director of the Centre for Emerging Infectious Diseases at the Chinese Academy of Sciences' Wuhan Institute of Virology, spent time in Australia as a -visiting scientist for three months from February 22 to May 21, 2006, where she worked at the CSIRO's top-level Australian Animal Health Laboratory, which has recently been -renamed.

The CSIRO would not comment on what work she undertook during her time here, but an archived and translated biography on the Wuhan Institute of Virology website states that she was working with the SARS virus.

"The SARS virus antibodies and genes were tested in the State Key Laboratory of Virology in Wuhan and the Animal Health Research Laboratory in Geelong, Australia," it states.

The Telegraph has obtained two photographs of her working at the CSIRO laboratories, including in the level-four lab, in 2006.

Dr Shi's protégé, Peng Zhou - now the head of the Bat Virus Infection and Immunity Project at the Wuhan Institute of Virology - spent three years at the bio-containment facility Australian Animal Health Laboratory between 2011 and 2014. He was sent by China to complete his doctorate at the CSIRO from 2009-2010.

During this time, Dr Zhou arranged for wild-caught bats to be transported alive by air from Queensland to the lab in Victoria where they were euthanised for dissection and studied for deadly viruses.

Dr Linfa Wang, while an Honorary Professor of the Wuhan Institute of Virology between 2005 and 2011, also worked in the CSIRO Office of the Chief Executive Science Leader in Virology between 2008 and 2011.

Federal Liberal Senator Sarah Henderson said it was "very concerning" that Chinese scientists had been conducting research into bat viruses at the CSIRO in Geelong, Victoria, in jointly funded projects between the Australian and Chinese governments.

"We need to exercise extreme care with any research projects involving foreign nationals which may compromise our national security or biosecurity," she said.

While the US has cut all funding to the Wuhan Institute of Virology, the CSIRO would not respond to -questions about whether it is still collaborating with it, saying only that it collaborates with research organisations from around the world to prevent diseases.

"As with all partners, CSIRO undertakes due diligence and takes security very seriously," a spokesman said. "CSIRO undertakes all research in accordance with strict biosecurity and legislative requirements."

IS THE RESEARCH WORTH THE RISK?

The US withdrew funding from controversial experiments that make pathogens more potent or likely to spread dangerous viruses in October 2014, concerned it could lead to a global pandemic.

The pause on funding for 21 "gain of function" studies was then lifted in December 2017.

Despite the concerns, the CSIRO continued to partner and fund research with the Wuhan Institute of Virology.

The CSIRO refused to respond to questions from The Saturday Telegraph about how much money went into joint research collaboration with the Chinese Academy of Science and its Wuhan Institute of Virology.

The Wuhan Institute still lists the CSIRO as a partner while the US has cut ties since the coronavirus outbreak.

The argument is whether it is worth developing these viruses to anticipate and prevent a pandemic when a leak of the virus could also cause one. Debate in the scientific community is heated.

There have also been serious concerns about a lack of adequate safety practices at the Wuhan Institute of Virology when dealing with deadly viruses.

A "Sensitive but Unclassified" cable, dated January 19, 2018, obtained by The Washington Post, revealed that US embassy scientists and diplomats in Beijing visited the laboratory and sent warnings back to Washington about inadequate safety practices and management weaknesses as it conducted research on coronaviruses from bats.

"During interactions with scientists at the WIV laboratory, they noted the new lab has a serious shortage of -appropriately trained technicians and investigators needed to safely operate this high-containment laboratory," the cable stated.

UNLIKELY CLAIMS VIRUS CREATED IN LAB Scientific consensus is that the virus came from a wet market. But the US's top spy agency confirmed on the record for the first time yesterday that the US intelligence committee is investigating whether COVID-19 was the result of an accident at a Wuhan laboratory.

The Office of the Director of National Intelligence acting director Richard Grenell said the virus was not created in a laboratory.

"The entire Intelligence Community has been consistently providing critical support to US policymakers and those responding to the COVID-19 virus, which originated in China," he said.

"The Intelligence Community also concurs with the wide scientific consensus that the COVID-19 virus was not man-made or genetically modified. As we do in all crises, the Community's experts respond by surging resources and producing critical intelligence on issues vital to US national security. The IC will continue to rigorously examine emerging information and intelligence to determine whether the outbreak began through contact with infected animals or if it was the result of an accident at a laboratory in Wuhan." Despite Mr Grenell's statement and scientific consensus that the virus was not created in a laboratory, based on its genome sequence the governments' research paper obtained by The Telegraph notes a study that claims it was created.

South China University of Technology researchers published a study on February 6 that concluded "the killer coronavirus probably originated from a laboratory in Wuhan. Safety level may need to be reinforced in high-risk biohazards laboratories".

"The paper is soon withdrawn because it 'was not supported by direct proofs', according to author Botao Xiano," the dossier noted, continuing to point out that: '"No scientists have confirmed or refuted the paper's findings', scholar Yanzhong Huang wrote on March 5." The Saturday Telegraph does not claim that the South China University of Technology study is credible, only that it has been included in this government research paper produced as part of the case against China.

CHINA'S COVER-UP OF EARLY SAMPLES The paper obtained by The Saturday Telegraph speaks about "the suppression and destruction of evidence" and points to "virus samples ordered destroyed at genomics labs, wildlife market stalls bleached, the genome sequence not shared publicly, the Shanghai lab closure for 'rectification', academic articles subjected to prior review by the Ministry of Science and Technology and data on asymptomatic 'silent carriers' kept secret".

It paints a picture of how the Chinese government deliberately covered up the coronavirus by silencing doctors who spoke out, destroying evidence from the Wuhan laboratory and refusing to provide live virus samples to international scientists working on a vaccine.

The US, along with other countries, has repeatedly -demanded a live virus sample from the first batch of coronavirus cases. This is understood to have not been forthcoming despite its vital importance in developing a vaccine while potentially providing an indication of where the virus originated.

THE LAB WORKER WHO DISAPPEARED Out of all the doctors, activists, journalists and scientists who have reportedly disappeared after speaking out about the coronavirus or criticising the response of Chinese authorities, no case is more intriguing and worrying than that of Huang Yan Ling.

A researcher at the Wuhan Institute of Virology, the South China Morning Post reported rumours swirling on Chinese social media that she was the first to be diagnosed with the disease and was -"patient zero".

Then came her reported disappearance, with her biography and image deleted from the Wuhan Institute of Virology's website.

On February 16 the institute denied she was -patient zero and said she was alive and well, but there has been no proof of life since then, fanning speculation.

DESTRUCTION OF EVIDENCE The dossier is damning of China's constant denials about the outbreak. "Despite evidence of human-human transmission from early December, PRC authorities deny it until January 20," it states.

"The World Health Organisation does the same. Yet officials in Taiwan raised concerns as early as December 31, as did experts in Hong Kong on January 4." The paper exposes the hypocrisy of China's self--imposed travel bans while condemning those of Australia and the United States, declaring: "Millions of people leave Wuhan after the outbreak and before Beijing locks down the city on January 23." "Thousands fly overseas. Throughout February, Beijing presses the US, Italy, India, Australia, Southeast Asian neighbours and others not to protect themselves via travel restrictions, even as the PRC imposes severe restrictions at home." In the paper, the Western governments are pushing back at what they call an "assault on international transparency".

"As EU diplomats prepare a report on the pandemic, PRC successfully presses Brussels to strike language on PRC disinformation," it states.

"As Australia calls for an independent inquiry into the pandemic, PRC threatens to cut off trade with Australia. "PRC has likewise responded furiously to US calls for transparency." Chair of Australia's Joint Parliamentary Committee on Intelligence and Security Andrew Hastie said after the cover-up and disinformation campaign from China, the world needed transparency and an inquiry.

"So many Australians have been damaged by the mismanagement of COVID-19 by the Chinese government, and if we truly are as close as Beijing suggests we are then we need answers about how this all started," he said.

KEY DATES IN COVID COVER-UP November 9, 2015 Wuhan Institute of Virology publish a study revealing they created a new virus in the lab from SARS-CoV.

December 6, 2019 Five days after a man linked to Wuhan's seafood market presented pneumonia-like symptoms, his wife contracts it, suggesting human to human transmission.

December 27 China's health authorities told a novel disease, then affecting some 180 patients, was caused by a new coronavirus.

December 26-30 Evidence of new virus emerges from Wuhan patient data.

December 31 Chinese internet authorities begin censoring terms from social media such as Wuhan Unknown Pneumonia.

January 1, 2020 Eight Wuhan doctors who warned about new virus are detained and condemned. January 3 China's top health authority issues a gag order.

January 5 Wuhan Municipal Health Commission stops releasing daily updates on new cases. Continues until January 18.

January 10 PRC official Wang Guangfa says outbreak "under control" and mostly a "mild condition".

January 12 Professor Zhang Yongzhen's lab in Shanghai is closed by authorities for "rectification", one day after it shares genomic sequence data with the world for the first time.

January 14 PRC National Health Commission chief Ma Xiaowei privately warns colleagues the virus is likely to develop into a major public health event.

January 24 Officials in Beijing prevent the Wuhan Institute of Virology from sharing sample isolates with the University of Texas.

February 6 China's internet watchdog tightens controls on social media platforms. February 9 Citizen-journalist and local businessman Fang Bin disappears. April 17Wuhan belatedly raises its official fatalities by 1290.
---
THE COVID FILES EXCLUSIVE Chinese scientists linked to virus probe studied in Australia

TWO Chinese scientists - who Western intelligence agencies are looking into as part of their probe into the origins of the global coronavirus contagion - studied live bats in Australia in research jointly funded by the Australian and Chinese governments. An investigation by The Daily Telegraph can reveal the Five Eyes intelligence agencies of Australia, Canada, NZ, UK and US, are understood to be looking closely at the work of a senior scientist at the Wuhan Institute of Virology, Peng Zhou, and fellow scientist Shi Zhengli, as they examine whether COVID-19 originated from a wet market or whether the naturally-occurring virus may have been inadvertently released from a level four laboratory in Wuhan.FULL REPORT PAGES 2-3


---
THE COVID FILES TOP MILITARY SCIENTIST HAS TIES WITH CSIRO

A SCIENTIST employed by China's People's Liberation Army, who has been genetically modifying coronaviruses and studying transmission from animals to humans, has had a longstanding professional relationship with the director of Australia's top bio-containment facility.

The Daily Telegraph can reveal the director of Australia's Animal Health Laboratory Dr Trevor Drew had a working relationship for at least seven years with a senior scientist employed by the PLA's Academy of Military Medical Sciences, Dr Tu Changchun.

The Daily Telegraph has obtained photographs of Dr Drew's visits to meet with Dr Tu in 2009 and 2016. One photo shows him smiling and holding Dr Tu up in the air during this trip.

Their relationship was forged through the Jilin University, where Dr Drew was a visiting professor of virology from 2009 to 2014 and, maintaining a relationship, visited again in 2016 while on a trip to China to lead "projects to improve China's capacity for the prevention, detection and control of rabies and Swine Fever." Jilin University, in the city of Changchun in China's northeast province, has -secret-level security credentials, "allowing it to participate in research and production for classified weapons and defence technology projects", according to Australian security analysts who have classified it "very high risk" for its high level of defence research.

The revelation comes amid calls from members of the Morrison Government for a federal oversight body to ensure there is no foreign -interference in the research sector, and to give checks and balances to foreign partnerships.

As well as being a -researcher at the Institute of Military Veterinary Medicine of the Chinese PLA's Academy of Military Medical Sciences, Tu Changchun is also a professor at Jilin University, according to both his biography and a now-deleted press-release on the university's website.

GENETIC ENGINEERING In his biography, his research direction is listed as "virus disease" and a description of his scientific research projects centres on genetic engineering of viruses.

At Dr Tu's page at the Jilin University website, it speaks about his work genetically modifying coronaviruses and other infectious diseases to see if they are transmissible to humans.

"Research on the source of SARS coronavirus transmission: by means of gene amplification, serological detection and virus isolation, the detection, isolation and identification of coronavirus in wild animals and domestic animals and poultry, so as to find the animal origin of SARS virus and study the virus the origin," an excerpt from his page at Jilin University states.

"Then, through animal -inoculation tests, SARS virus susceptible animals are screened to study the animal-human transmission route." Along with many other Chinese researchers in this field, Tu Changchun's research affiliated with the Academy of Military Medical Sciences often involves finding new diseases that come from animals.

MILITARY RESEARCH The Academy of Military Sciences is the highest-level research institute of the -People's Liberation Army, -according to PLA Daily.

The Australian Strategic Policy Institute's China's defence university tracker states that Jilin University works closely with China's nuclear weapons complex and hosts at least two defence research labs.

They are located in its College of Computer Science and Technology and in the College of Chemistry. "Its Key Laboratory of Attack and Defence Simulation Technology for Naval Warfare, Ministry of Education is involved in -cybersecurity research for the Navy," the ASPI project states. "The lab's academic committee is headed by a computer scientist from China Aerospace Science and Technology Corporation, a leading state-owned missile manufacturer." Dr Tu is also listed on the Wuhan Institute of Virology's website as sitting on the scientific advisory committee of its Centre for Emerging -Infectious Diseases - the -institute at the centre of the global probe into the origins of the coronavirus.

The Daily Telegraph has previously revealed that two scientists from the Wuhan -Institute of Virology, Shi Zhengli and Peng Zhou, who are a focus of the Five Eyes -intelligence probe into the -origins of COVID-19, have worked at the CSIRO in Australia where they conducted research on live bats.

This Wuhan Institute of Virology committee on which Dr Tu sits is headed by Linfa Wang, according to the website. Dr Linfa Wang, while an Honorary Professor of the Wuhan Institute of Virology between 2005 and 2011 also worked in the CSIRO Office of the Chief Executive Science Leader in Virology -between 2008 and 2011.

OVERSIGHT DEMANDS There is no suggestion Dr Drew has engaged in any untoward or unethical research through his relationship with Dr Tu. Questions for him were answered by the CSIRO.

A spokesman for the CSIRO said Dr Drew did not receive a salary or any financial benefit from Jilin Uni-versity and has never studied bat diseases. The CSIRO -defended its links with other research institutes.

"To enable collaboration, CSIRO employees are often members of affiliate research institutes, committees and other bodies both in Australia and overseas. When entering into any such arrangement, CSIRO staff are bound by CSIRO's code of conduct and related policies and procedures," it said.

Liberal MPs including Matt Canavan, Sarah Henderson and Jim Molan say partnerships between Australia and Chinese universities show an oversight body is needed to -maintain integrity in the -research sector which is among those vulnerable to foreign influence.

The Australian Strategic Policy Institute lists Jilin University as "very high risk for its high level of defence -research and links to China's nuclear weapons program".

Its project states Jilin University is directly under the Ministry of Education and came under the joint supervision of the ministry and -defence industry agency, SASTIND, in 2016.

ASPI's executive director, Peter Jennings said Chinese President Xi Jinping has brought China's university sector closer to the PLA and intelligence. "We need to now look much more carefully at those partnerships with Chinese universities to make sure there are no military implications and in particular areas of research that Australia could be doing that could benefit the PLA," he said.The CSIRO has refused to publish details of its Chinese partnerships.
---
THE COVID FILES OZ-FUNDED VIRUS PAPER USED MILITARY FACILITY

CHINA'S People's Liberation Army has been involved in scientific research, co-funded by the Australian government, into the origins of the coronavirus which has been published in esteemed medical journals.

In an explosive revelation, a study co-funded by the Australian Research Council and the Chinese government, and trumpeted by The University of Sydney as helping to solve the puzzle of how COVID-19 transferred from animals to humans, relied on a laboratory in the People's Liberation Army's Academy of Military Medical Sciences to conduct its "genetic sequencing" and "virus isolation".

The director of this Institute, Professor Wu-Chan Cao, who is thanked in the paper's acknowledgments for his "substantial contribution", has the rank of colonel and is a Wuhan Institute of Virology board member in a clear conflict of interest.

One of the study's co-authors, Yi-Gang Tong, began working in the same PLA-run Institute in 2005.

The Wuhan Institute of Virology is at the centre of a global probe into whether the naturally-occurring coronavirus was accidentally released from its laboratory or came from a local wet market, which scientists believe is the most likely scenario.

This study is one of two scientific papers on the coronavirus undertaken by University of Sydney virologist and evolutionary biologist, Professor Edward Holmes in conjunction with researchers in China, who received funding from the Chinese government.

Professor Holmes is highly regarded in his field and the only western scientist that was part of the consortium of the Shanghai Public Health Clinical Centre and School of Public Health who first uploaded the genetic sequence of the coronavirus on January 11.

There is no suggestion that Professor Holmes' own contribution to the research project was anything but independent, ethical and of the highest scientific standards. His work on the papers was funded by Australian grants only.

His February 2020 study looked at whether an animal called a pangolin - and not only bats - could be an intermediate host of the coronavirus to facilitate its transfer to humans.

ARMY FACILITIES Professor Holmes has used this research to call for a ban on wet markets and the trade in wildlife.

The study titled "Identifying SARS-CoV-2 related coronaviruses in Malayan pangolins" was completed and submitted by February 7, 2020 and it was peer-reviewed and published in Nature online on March 26.

"Although bats are likely reservoir hosts for SARS-CoV-2, the identity of any intermediate host that might have facilitated transfer to humans is unknown," the study states in its summary. "Here we report the identification of SARS-CoV-2 relate coronaviruses in Malayan pangolins seized in anti-smuggling operations in southern China." The Daily Telegraph can reveal that the "sequencing" and "virus isolation" on which the study relied was done by laboratories run by the PLA in China.

In fine print at the very end of the paper in the acknowledgments section, it states: "We thank Prof. Wu-Chun Cao, Dr. Na Jia, Dr. Ya-Wei Zhang, Dr. Jia-Fu Jiang, Dr. Bao-Gui Jiang, and their team in State Key Laboratory of Pathogen and Biosecurity, Beijing Institute of Microbiology and Epidemiology, Beijing for their substantial contributions to this study, including co-ordinating among research parties, conducting virus isolation, qPCR and sequencing." The State Key Laboratory of Pathogen and Biosecurity is part of the Beijing Institute of Microbiology and Epidemiology, which sits under the Academy of Military Medical Sciences.

The Academy of Military Sciences is the highest-level research institute of the People's Liberation Army.

RANKING RESEARCHER The director of this institute is Professor Wu-Chan Cao, who also received the top acknowledgment in the research paper for his "substantial contributions to this study" including "co-ordinating among research parties".

In his official biography he is pictured in his military uniform and it states he has the "rank of colonel".

"Now the director of the Institute of Microbiology and epidemiology, Military Medical Science Academy of the PLA, director of the State Key Laboratory of pathogen and Biosecurity," it states.

Colonel Cao also sits on the board for the Wuhan Institute of Virology's Scientific Advisory Committee of Centre for Emerging Infectious Diseases, according to its website.

A University of Sydney spokeswoman said Professor Holmes' work was "academically independent" and that he had not received any research or personal funding from the Chinese Government or Chinese companies or institutions.

"Where he has undertaken research with scientists from China his work has been funded by the Australian Research Council, the National Health and Medical Research Council and the University of Sydney," she said.

"We strongly defend the right of our researchers to collaborate with scientists around the world in line with all relevant Australian laws and government guidelines.

"Prof Holmes has no link with the Academy of Military Science. Their involvement with the research was declared in the acknowledgments, as is standard practice.

"Dr Cao co-ordinated the laboratory work before Prof Holmes' involvement. He did not direct or supervise the work of Prof Holmes which was undertaken independently." The University of Syndey website states: "Professor Holmes, a co-author, is the only non-China based academic on the paper." Another co-authored paper by Professor Holmes, published in Cell, provides commentary on samples taken from the Wuhan wet market and states "not all of the early (COVID-19) were market associated, it is possible that the emergence story is more complicated than first suspected".

This was cited in a press release by the Embassy of the People's Republic of China in the Commonwealth in Australia that criticised media coverage "playing up the so-called wet market in China".

WORRYING LINKS Charles Sturt University Professor of Public Ethics Clive Hamilton supported the calls for an oversight agency by Morrison government MPs.

While there was no doubting the honesty and professionalism of Australian researchers, legitimate questions should be asked as to the involvement of the Chinese military.

"It's clear that the universities are not properly overseeing the kinds of collaborations that their scientists are undertaking because there are many instances of sensitive research in Australian universities being done in collaboration with Chinese scientists with links to China's military or who are likely passing valuable information on to China's companies or intelligence -services," he said.

"Universities have been very reluctant to admit there is a problem and have consistently hidden behind the Defence Trade Controls Act which prohibits the export of sensitive technology but does not prohibit Chinese military scientists working on sensitive projects in Australian laboratories."The Australian Strategic Policy Institute's analysis of Chinese institutions has designated the Academy of Military Science very high risk as the PLA's premier institution for military science. It is -responsible for leading and co-ordinating military science for the whole military.
---
We started the year with the state ablaze, and finish it with many Sydneysiders in the grip of a Christmas COVID lockdown. Little wonder politicians and bureaucrats lead the Saturday Extra list of the 50 Most Watched People of 2020. But even as their bushfire and COVID briefings became must-see TV, firefighters and scientists also found themselves in the spotlight as the nation marvelled at their expertise and determination to pull us through. The usual scandals, crims and business movers and shakers also dominated the headlines, as did the stars who lead the flight from Tinseltown to the safety of Aussiewood. And while we watched the US election as closely as if it had been our own, for many it is the unexpected heroes who made the most impact. Who can forget volunteer firey Paul Parker's choice words in telling off the PM? And comedian Celeste Barber who rallied Australians to raise a staggering $51m for the Rural Fire Service only to run into a wall of controversy about how it would be distributed? Read on to see who else made our team's list ...

STATE POLITICS HEALTH MINISTER BRAD HAZZARD HE is one of NSW'S longest-serving parliamentarians, but no role has been as important for Liberal MP Brad Hazzard than as the health minster during a one in 100-year pandemic.

Seen by his colleagues as "a safe pair of hands", Hazzard was handed the portfolio in 2017 after a series of controversies beset his predecessor. Three years on, the former high school science teacher and solicitor found himself thrust in the spotlight along with Premier Gladys Berejiklian, federal officials and senior health bureaucrats over the handling of potentially-infected passengers on the Ruby Princess.

A subsequent Special Commission of Inquiry led by Bret Walker, SC, subsequently found the health department had made "serious mistakes", including failure to ensure self-isolation aboard the ship. The incident appeared to serve as an early wake-up call. Unlike other major cities, Sydney had battled only a handful of outbreaks with no community transmissions for almost a month until the latest cluster on the northern beaches.

Fiercely protective of his department, Hazzard credits the health officials led by NSW Chief Health Officer Dr Kerry Chant for guiding the government through the pandemic. Having entered state parliament almost three decades ago, many wonder if this will be Hazzard's final - and most significant - role. LS

TREASURER DOMINIC PERROTTET NSW Treasurer Dominic Perrottet began the year expecting to deliver his fourth consecutive surplus. However, that was before devastating bushfires tore across the state followed closely by a global pandemic that forced the state into a hard lockdown.

Instead, the man touted as a future leadership contender was forced to declare NSW had been plunged into an $16 billion deficit with a return to surplus not expected until 2024.

Despite the enormous challenges, Perrottet has managed to keep the state trucking along with two COVID-19 response packages worth a record $29 billion, including critical health funding for contact tracing - argued to be the nation's best - along with vowing to use record low interest rates and the State's fiscal and economic firepower to restore jobs and rebuilt the economy.

Throughout the year Perrottet has worked closely with industry to keep Australia's biggest economy open alongside the virus. Unlike other states, the NSW budget looked beyond the crisis with a tax reform plan to drive greater home ownership, productivity and economic prosperity.

This includes a job-creating $100 billion infrastructure pipeline along with the bold move to slash the headline payroll tax rate to the lowest in the nation as part of an effort to lure national and international businesses to NSW.

With the latest COVID outbreak resulting in a temporary return of local restrictions, the economic challenges for Perrottet are far from over. LS

FORMER MP DARYL MAGUIRE WHO would have thought a NSW MP forced to resign in 2018 would be at the heart of one of 2020's biggest political scandals. The ICAC inquiry into former Wagga Wagga MP Daryl Maguire began in September, investigating allegations he used his position in government, including as parliamentary secretary, to broker business deals for his own financial gain.

Among the shocking corruption allegations was that Maguire was allegedly running a cash for visas set-up out of his parliamentary office. Maguire admitted to ICAC he received thousands in exchange for procuring visas for at least 14 people, three of whom became citizens. Under the scheme it was alleged money was funnelled to Maguire through a company called G8Way International.

But the ICAC hearing went from standard to sensational when phone taps of Maguire's conversations with Premier Gladys Berejiklian were played, in which the ex-MP discussed the Western Sydney land deal he brokered in order to pay of his debts.

The Premier was forced to admit she had been in a "close personal relationship" with Maguire since 2015. In the recording Maguire told Berejiklian the deal would pay off his $1.5m debt.

ICAC's findings are yet to be handed down, but during the headline grabbing hearing Maguire admitted to monetising his time in office. JM

FEDERAL POLITICS PRIME MINISTER SCOTT MORRISON 2020 got off the a bad start for Prime Minister Scott Morrison. While the flames of Black Summer bushfires devoured towns along the eastern states, he was snapped chilling poolside in Hawaii, in a poorly timed holiday that did not go down well with many members of the public and political commentators. But then the pandemic hit Australia hard in March and with tough decisions needing to be made, ScoMo was able to claw back respect in many quarters with his resolute stance.

Some of the most historic decisions of the year were made by Morrison and the newly formed national cabinet, including implementing level four travel restrictions and a national lockdown.

Morrison's stance against China also made headlines around the world as he pushed ahead with calls for an investigation into the origins of the virus, despite emphatic pushback from our major trading partner.

Having learned from his early stumbles in the Black Summer bushfires, when many Australians criticised the PM for his lack of visibility during the crisis, Morrison was talking to the public almost daily via his televised press conferences at the height of the pandemic.

Australians have seen more of our Prime Minister than ever this year, and opinion polls show him holding a healthy lead in both the preferred PM and leader satisfaction polls.

But while the all-consuming pandemic has allowed the PM a chance to avoid some of the more controversial political topics, such as the climate change debate, next year will offer another stern test of his public support if cases decline and the country gets to grips with the financial aftermath. JM

TREASURER JOSH FRYDENBERG ONE of the hardest and most high -pressure jobs during a national crisis is that of treasurer, given the task of keeping the economy stable and food on the dinner table for millions of Australians, thousands of whom lost their jobs overnight.

Josh Frydenberg had to give Australians the devastating news that the pandemic had tipped country into recession for the first time in 29 years.

And with the backdrop of the virus Frydenberg was given the enormous task of trying to keep people in jobs and businesses viable when most of the country was shut down.

The resulting JobKeeper policy was one of the most influential government measures of the year, managing to support businesses to keep on employees even when retail turnover was plummeting.

The Treasurer again dominated the headlines when the government announced an increase to the JobKeeper payment for those who had lost their jobs.

The biggest challenge for Frydenberg this year was delivering one of the most important federal budgets of our time. The pandemic dashed the government's hopes of a surplus, and instead Frydenberg's budget forecasted a net national debt of $966 billion by 2024.

The budget featured cash payments for the elderly to stimulate spending, and introduced the JobMaker program, incentivising businesses to hire new employees.

Frydenberg also delivered tax cuts, the Home Builder scheme, more home care packages and a boost for the manufacturing sector.

While 2020 was all about short-term emergency policies, once the JobKeeper payments expire in March next year and the country looks to get back to some semblance of normal, the recovery will be an even tougher challenge for one of the government's most challenging portfolios. JM

COVID NSW CHIEF MEDICAL OFFICER DR KERRY CHANT IT is rare that a bureaucrat ends up centrestage - except for when there is a controversy. Not so for NSW chief health officer Dr Kerry Chant who overnight became one of our most recognisable faces as she was beamed into the homes of millions for the best part of the year to deliver the latest on the pandemic.

Embroiled early on in the Ruby Princess scandal that questioned some of the decisions of her department's bureaucrats, Dr Chant quickly recovered to become a trusted source for information about the pandemic, local outbreaks and contact-tracing.

At the start of the pandemic, health ministerBrad Hazzard revealed Chant was barely sleeping, at one stage working 31 hours straight before fronting the cameras. During an interview, Chant admitted she had made it to the supermarket just once in the past eight weeks, with her 19-year-old daughter doing most of the cooking.

In recognition of her achievements, the University of NSW, where Chant obtained her medical degree, recently awarded her the 2020 Chancellor's Award for Exceptional Alumni Achievement. In an acceptance speech Chant delivered remotely, the Epping resident revealed it was her passion to achieve the elimination of hepatitis C.

"Once I divert my attention away from COVID-19, my passion for the elimination of hepatitis C and working in partnership with academics, non-government organisations and the community in responding to hepatitis C will continue," she said. LS

PROFESSOR JOHN SKERRITT WHEN Australians begin receiving their first COVID vaccines, it will be as a result of the work of Health Department deputy secretary responsible for the Therapeutic Goods Administration, Adjunct Professor John Skerritt.

In charge of whether the vaccines will be approved for use, the former medical researcher was working in a laboratory when the race began to find a cure for AIDS back it the 1980s.

Now overseeing the TGA, he will play a critical role in deciding whether any of the vaccines the federal government has signed up for are good to go, along with overseeing the critical transportation here. In the case of the Pfizer vaccine, which has to be kept at -70C, it will be shipped by air and kept in dry ice with small IT devices attached to each batch to remotely transmit if a pot heats up accidentally.

Skerritt, who is operating on "four to five hours" sleep, has effectively told his team to "cancel summer" in order to have the vaccines ready in March rollout. Describing the vaccine development effort as the "biggest thing in medicine in the last 100 years" Skerritt has said that while vaccination would remain an individual decision, those thinking about giving it a miss were strongly urged to consider the community.

"It's not something you do for yourself," he said. "Think about what your position might do to your grandmother, your neighbour's grandmother or just someone you might walk past at Coles or Woolworths - that little old lady you've never met." "We recognise that at the end of the day it will be your right of choice as to whether to be vaccinated, but we encourage all people to think about the broader public good." LS

DEPUTY PREMIER JOHN BARILARO IT was a fiery and frenetic year for NSW Deputy Premier John Barilaro, whose brand of all-or-nothing politics very nearly proved his undoing.

His father died, he lost his licence for speeding, and he bizarrely became the obsession of popular YouTube conspiracy theorist cum political commentator and self-styled comedian Jordan Shanks who attacked him over a range of topics including bushfires and brumbies.

Barilaro took four weeks' mental health leave in September after threatening to split the Coalition government over a planning policy designed to expand koala protections.

The NSW Nationals leader sent a series of text message tirades to political allies when his bid for federal politics collapsed in May.

Sky News revealed Barilaro accused federal Nationals leader Michael McCormack of undermining his attempt to contest the Eden-Monaro by-election.

"To feel threatened by me clearly shows you have failed your team and failed as a leader. You will never be acknowledged by me as our leader. You aren't. You never will be," Barilaro wrote to McCormack.

"The Nats had a chance to create history, to change momentum, and you had a candidate that was prepared to risk everything to make it happen. What did you risk? Nothing. Hope you are proud of yourself." The Daily Telegraph revealed Mr Barilaro told a parliamentary colleague that friend and fellow minister Andrew Constance was a "c…" for weighing up whether to contest Eden-Monaro as well.

The NSW Nationals leader remains popular among his party and voter base in the bush.

He has vowed to have more of his political fights behind closed doors next year, believing he has proved to swing voters in the bush the NSW Nationals are not beholden to the Liberal party. JM

PREMIER GLADYS BEREJIKLIAN PREMIER Gladys Berejiklian has had the most tumultuous year of her political career, leading the state through the bushfires then the pandemic, before being embroiled in personal and political scandal.

There's no doubt she has been regarded as a strong leader throughout much of the year, but it didn't start out that way.

The Ruby Princess debacle which cost the lives of many and led to a massive spread of COVID across the country could have been avoided with stronger restrictions by NSW Health on quarantine.

The Premier was able to get through the scandal to put NSW into a tough lockdown, keeping people confined to their homes for all but the most essential of activities.

Berejiklian remained popular with voters, especially as her interstate colleagues slammed their borders shut while she vowed to keep the state open.

All in all the year was looking better for one of the most hardworking politicians in Australia but then the Daryl Maguire scandal hit.

News of Berejiklian's close relationship with the disgraced MP sent shockwaves through her government and shattered her reputation as a stickler for the rules. Raising even more eyebrows was the fact Berejiklian had fired Maguire when his dodgy deeds first came to light.

Speculation as to whether she would resign dominated the news cycle for weeks, as debate raged as to whether she had breached her own ministerial code of conduct.

Berejiklian could have been forgiven for approaching the end of 2020 with a sense of relief at having weathered its storms and due some well-earnt rest.

But the rapidly blooming Avalon COVID cluster put an end to any thoughts like that.

Another hill to climb, and one which the state leader is so far tackling with her usual stoicism and calm. JM

CMO PAUL KELLY BEFORE 2020 it's fair to say most Australians had no clue who our chief medical officer was. Paul Kelly was thrust into the spotlight as deputy CMO to Brendan Murphy, with both men alongside Nick Coatsworth appearing on televisions across the country to provide COVID information, advice and data to the public. Since June Professor Kelly has been acting in the role of CMO and has been steering the fight to flatten the curve with his team of pandemic experts. The decision to go for a flatten-thecurve strategy, or suppression, rather than eradication, was made by the expert medical panel and has shaped the country's pandemic response. Professor Kelly has been tough on those flouting health advice from the beginning of the pandemic. His chastisement of young people not following the rules and businesses not enforcing social distancing made headlines with the stark warning "young people have died". Professor Kelly was pushed by journalists after promising the release of the government's coronavirus modelling, only to backtrack at a later press conference. It was a time when the public was desperate to know the figures influencing the sweeping restrictions that forced many businesses to close their doors during lockdown. The modelling was eventually released in April. JM

BUSHFIRES RFS VOLUNTEER PAUL PARKER VOLUNTEER firefighter Paul Parker landed his 20 seconds of fame after a spontaneous outburst directed at Scott Morrison at the height of the bushfire crisis. The Rural Fire Service member made his anti-ScoMo sentiment clear to an unsuspecting Channel 7 cameraman after returning from the fire ground on the far south coast in early January. In his RFS truck, Mr Parker, 57, sidled up to the cameraman in Nelligen and asked if he was "from the media". "Go and tell the Prime Minister to go and get f...ed from Nelligen," Parker said. "We really enjoy doing this s... f...khead." He later collapsed from exhaustion on the side of the road. Explaining his strong choice of words weeks later, Parker said it was in response to the PM's comments about whether RFS volunteers should be paid. But Morrison, whose standing in the fire-affected communities had already weathered a battering after his frosty reception in Cobargo days earlier, said his comments were misreported. After Parker's clip was aired on Seven News and, subsequently, by international media outlets, he became a lightning rod of anger aimed at the federal government's handling of the bushfires. He popped up on Channel 10's The Project, inspired the #Istandwithfiremanpaul Twitter trend, got a mention in federal parliament and a GoFundMe page. Even strangers were turning up at his local pub to leave money on the bar for his next beer. According to the RFS, Parker was never dismissed and continues to be a member. ABM

COMEDIAN CELESTE BARBER MOVED by the devastation of the Black Summer bushfires that threatened members of her family living at Eden on the far south coast of NSW, comedian Celeste Barber launched a Facebook fundraiser in January in the hope of raising $300,000 for the NSW Rural Fire Service (RFS) and Brigades Donation Fund. The fundraiser quickly went viral, with about 1.3 million donors chipping in. Soon enough Barber had raised $51.3m. An overjoyed Barber declared she would share the funds around: "I'm going to make sure Victoria gets some, that South Australia gets some, also families of people who have died in these fires, the wildlife …" But with the RFS donation fund controlled by a trust deed, it emerged the funds could only be spent on the purchase and maintenance of equipment, training and administrative costs for the RFS and could not be passed on to fire services in other states and charities, such as the Australian Red Cross and animal welfare group WIRES. Given the amount of backlash the RFS received from donors hoping their money would be spread around, the RFS decided to consult the Supreme Court. In May the court confirmed the money could not be distributed but could be used to support rural firefighters injured while fighting fires, the families of fallen firefighters and for trauma counselling. Barber, always popular on social media, finished the year as Google's No.1 trending public figure. AS

LAW & ORDER NSW POLICE COMMISSIONER MICK FULLER HANDLING a global pandemic wasn't part of the job description when Mick Fuller signed on as the NSW Police Commissioner in 2017. But if it wasn't for police on the doors at quarantine hotels in 2020, NSW may have faced the same crippling coronavirus outbreak as Victoria. Fuller was forced to step outside the traditional boundaries of a commissioner's role this year and the stakes were high. In March, NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian asked him to lead the combat agency for the health crisis. That meant overseeing the enormous hotel quarantine operation, enforcing strict and sometimes unpopular public health orders and administering the NSW/Victoria border closure with his own troops. Fuller had experience in major events from his time as the Central Metropolitan Region commander but this represented an unprecedented logistical challenge. At its peak, NSW Police were manning 28 quarantine hotels around Sydney and managing the arrival of up to 500 travellers a day. To date, almost 110,000 travellers have been through a 14-day quarantine under his watch. Fuller was called on again in July to close and enforce the Victorian/NSW border. He had 36 hours to make it happen, including mobilising 700 police officers from all over the state to man checkpoints in remote locations. In between all that was the contentious opposition to the Black Lives Matter protest and his decision to take on the investigation into the virusladen Ruby Princess cruise ship. After little more than 10 days off all year, it is understood Fuller had planned a Queensland holiday in January. But COVID-19 has shaken things up again for the commissioner with the northern beaches cluster putting a ban on Sydneysiders travelling north. ABM

EDUCATION NSW TEACHERS FEDERATION BOSS ANGELO GAVRIELATOS WHEN the pandemic pushed schooling from the classroom to the loungeroom, there was a new-found respect for teachers. While COVID-19 ultimately consumed his first full year as NSW Teachers Federation president, Angelo Gavrielatos has been buoyed by peak public support for the state's public school teachers. The NSW Teachers Federation cited polling that suggested 91 per cent of parents gained more respect for the profession since the outbreak of COVID-19. The NSW Teachers Federation largely gave the government free rein during the pandemic, other than fighting for the right of chronically ill, pregnant and older teachers to work from home. The government was loath to admit it needed schools open for the good of the economy for fear Gavrielatos would take them to task over any implication teachers are glorified child minders. The kid gloves will be off next year when Gavrielatos leverages all that public goodwill in his fight for better conditions and pay for teachers. Expect fireworks when the findings of an independent review of changing teacher workload come down in February, which are likely to show teachers burdened by administrative tasks need more time and departmental support to do their jobs. New salary negotiations are due to begin in October and Gavrielatos already has his nose out of joint over the Berejiklian's government's 12-month teacher wage freeze announced in May. Gavrielatos this year threw his union's support behind The Sunday Telegraph's campaign for more school counsellors and mandatory mental health training for teachers. While teachers will be afforded the training they asked for, he will not rest until there is at least one school counsellor for every 500 students. JM

CATHOLIC SCHOOLS NSW CEO DALLAS McINERNEY CATHOLIC Schools NSW boss Dallas McInerney this year proved himself to be one of the shrewdest operators in the state's education system. The former corporate regulator and financier has arrested falling enrolments at the state's Catholic schools, which started sliding on the back of the 2017 Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse. With student numbers shored up, he is going on a building spree worth close to $500m to reverse decades of decay. It has been said the building bonanza is the largest capital expansion in Australian Catholic education history. If it sounds like McInerney is in a rush to cement Catholic schools as the clear choice between public and high priced private schools, it could be because Canberra is calling. McInerney is the hot favourite to replace NSW Senator Jim Molan at the next federal election, which could be called as soon as August 7. At a series of late-night crisis meetings of the NSW Education Standards Authority board this year, McInerney played a large role ensuring the HSC went ahead during the pandemic. It was McInerney who spearheaded the campaign to have NSW chief health officer Kerry Chant overturn a ban on the first XV GPS rugby competition between top private schools such as St Ignatius' College Riverview, The King's School and St Joseph's College. JM EDUCATION MINISTER SARAH MITCHELL BUSHFIRES, bomb threats and a pandemic proved the making of Education Minister Sarah Mitchell. In her first full year in the job, Ms Mitchell steered more than 800,000 students from 2209 public schools through natural and public health disasters. The Berejiklian government has dined out on its investment in new and upgraded schools, but Mitchell's year was defined by the schools she was forced to close.

During the Black Summer bushfires 350 public schools across the state were closed, two of which burned down. A month after the bushfire season ended, Mitchell defied the NSW Teachers Federation to keep NSW public schools open during the pandemic for families who could not keep their children at home. Students who could stay home spent a month learning online, thanks in no small part to the swift dispatch of 13,520 computers and 8440 internet modems. Positive cases of COVID-19 have so far forced the closure of 35 public schools, most of which were cleaned and reopened within a day. HSC students sat their final exams against the odds, despite temporary school closures because of more than 30 bomb threats. Mitchell has used the dying days of 2020 to finally step out of the shadow of her predecessor, Rob Stokes, and set her own agenda. A rush of reforms included clawing back power for schools from failing principals with new enforceable targets for HSC results, phonics, NAPLAN scores, attendance, wellbeing and the real-world success of graduates. Mitchell also ushered in much needed mandatory mental health training for teachers. The Sunday Telegraph is still calling on Mitchell to increase the number of school counsellors to at least one for every 500 students to address an alarming increase in youth suicide. JM

PROPERTY JEAN NASSIF REVELATIONS about cocaine possession, fast cars, a lawsuit against broadcaster Ray Hadley and multimillion-dollar property wins has meant Jean Nassif's 2020 has been a rollercoaster. The Toplace founder and glamorous property developer's year started with a bang amid revelations he pleaded guilty to possessing a small amount of cocaine at The Star casino in September 2019. The 52-year-old was celebrating wife Nissy's 32nd birthday when police with drug sniffer dogs found 0.35g. This is the same Nissy made famous after Nassif gifted her a Lamborghini with the words: "Congratulations Mrs Nassif. You like?" The 2019 video went viral. Nassif was given an 18-month conditional release order and no conviction was recorded on account of his good character. He then took on 2GB giant Ray Hadley in the Federal Court, alleging Hadley falsely claimed on his top rating radio show that Nassif was a shonky builder. The matter will drag into 2021, with reports Hadley and Nassif are hoping to settle the matter. In October The Sunday Telegraph revealed Nassif said he would voluntarily replace almost 380 bathrooms in a Botany apartment complex after NSW Building Commissioner David Chandler uncovered serious flaws during destructive testing. But it wasn't all that bad. Throughout 2020 the NSW government fast-tracked the approval of a 167m tower at 189 Macquarie St in Parramatta. In another state government decision, which will net his company tens of millions, large swathes of Castle Hill (including 6000sq m of his property) was rezoned to high density - increasing the property value by an estimated 60 per cent. BP IN THE COURTS DANNY AND LEILA ABDALLAH OUT of unspeakable tragedy emerged this year's most inspiring story of love and forgiveness. Siblings Antony, 13, Angelina, 12, and Sienna Abdallah, 9, and their 11-yearold cousin, Veronique Sakr, were killed instantly by drunk and high driver Samuel William Davidson, 30, on February 1. Angelina would have turned 13 on Christmas Eve. The children had been out for ice cream on a hot summer's night when Davidson lost control of his speeding Mitsubishi four-wheel-drive, mounted the footpath and killed the children. Days after her children, Sienna, Angelina and Antony, died their mother, Leila Abdallah, forgave the driver. "The guy, I know he was drunk, driving on this street. Right now I can't hate him. I don't want to see him, I don't hate him," she told reporters. "I think in my heart to forgive him … I'm not going to hate him, because that's not who we are." Leila and Danny, as well as Veronique's mother, Bridgette Sakr, have all publicly forgiven the man who killed their children. While their Catholic faith is a constant source of comfort, it hasn't blunted the constant pain the parents are still suffering. People across NSW will be encouraged to reflect on the need for forgiveness in their own lives and look to the example set by the Abdallah and Sakr families on February 1, which will be called i4give day. Davidson will be sentenced on manlaughter charges next year. JM

MICK HAWI EVEN from beyond the grave, murdered former Comanchero bikie boss Mick Hawi had influence in 2020. The trial of two men charged with his killing yielded little in the way of results for the prosecution and police in arguably the biggest organised crime assassination case this decade. Yusuf Nazlioglu and Jamal Eljaidi were found not guilty by a jury in September. One of the key pieces of evidence before the court was that Hawi's shooter was believed to be about 185cm and the driver was about 177cm. Nazlioglu and Eljaidi didn't match this. Eljaidi is close to 200cm tall. Another man, Ahmad Doudar pleaded guilty to being an accessory after the fact to the murder. The result was Doudar being sentenced to a stint in jail so short he might not have enough time to finish a cup of coffee while he's there (even less if he wins his pending appeal). The case reached farcical levels when, after the trial, a police complaint letter about how the crown ran the trial was posted to social media. BH

MICHAEL IBRAHIM THE ever-intriguing Ibrahim family were among the most talked about people this year thanks to the high point of the drug bust that saw John's younger brother Michael locked up for a maximum of 30 years. Getting sucked in by an undercover cop who got him on the line for importing almost two tonnes of drugs and millions of cigarettes didn't give Michael much wiggle room when he was sentenced. Michael pleaded guilty at an early stage of the case - earning him time off his sentence as an incentive. He also hired Australia's most expensive barrister, Bret Walker SC, to run his sentencing hearing. It didn't seem to have much affect when Judge Dina Yehia sentenced Ibrahim to a maximum 30 years' prison with a minimum 18-year term, in the Downing Centre District Court in May. BH

IRISH BACKBACKERS NATHAN KELLY AND CHRISTOPHER McLAUGHLIN ESTABLISHED wisdom suggests you should always reject the first offer during any negotiation. For the office of DPP Lloyd Babb SC, this case was the exception to the rule and the reason it was one of the most discussed criminal cases of 2020. Irish backpackers Nathan Kelly and Christopher McLaughlin were acquitted by a jury in the NSW Supreme Court of murdering Paul Tavelardis during a huge night on the drink in Sydney's inner west in December 2018. But it didn't have to be this way. McLaughlin's lawyers Simon Joyner and Margaret Cunneen SC made numerous offers to the ODPP for their client to plead guilty to manslaughter in the year leading up to the murder trial, only to have Babb's office reject the approach. "It was truly an unusual set of circumstances - we had no alternative but to run a vigorous defence and we won," Joyner said. The trial heard that witnesses rang Triple-0 and said "there's two men killing a guy, just get the police here". Kelly and McLaughlin were acquitted on September 21 and caught the first plane back to Ireland - at taxpayer expense. BH

BEN ROBERTS SMITH THE nation's most decorated living war hero and Victoria Cross recipient was never far from the headlines in 2020 as the Seven West Media executive sued Nine/Fairfax over 2018 newspaper reports which he says are defamatory because they portray him as someone who committed murder while on deployment to Afghanistan. Roberts-Smith claims he was defamed in reports in which it was alleged was involved in unlawful killings as an Australian soldier in Afghanistan between 2009 and 2012. Roberts-Smith will also dispute a separate allegation at the defamation trial that he punched a woman in a domestic violence incident in 2018. The trials was due before the court in June but had to be delayed until 2021 following the coronavirus outbreak. It's now set down for June next year. After hiring an expensive team of lawyers and a high-profile PR firm to counter the claims - at a high cost reportedly also borne by his Seven boss Kerry Stokes - the retired Special Air Service soldier asked that the six-week trial be brought forward as it is causing him additional stress and anxiety. In addition to an Australian Defence Force investigation into war crimes, Roberts-Smith is also the subject of two Australian Federal Police investigations. Adding to the courtroom intrigue, Roberts-Smith was photographed holding hands and riding scooters with a female defamation lawyer who works for his Sydney lawyer in August. AS

SAM BURGESS HIT with an interim AVO after police alleged he threatened his ex-father-inlaw, Mitchell Hooke, during a visit to Hooke's Southern Highlands home in October, 2019, South Sydney star Sam Burgess spent 2020 battling two police charges - one of intimidation, the other of domestic assault - after his estranged wife, Phoebe Burgess, reported him. Burgess would plead not guilty to both charges when the estranged couple finally faced off in a Moss Vale courtroom in November, 2020. The court appearance came a month after the NSW Police and NRL integrity unit launched separate investigations into allegations South Sydney doctor Andrew McDonald was called to Burgess's eastern suburbs home in November, 2018, to attend the rugby league player following a dayslong drug-fuelled bender. McDonald allegedly administered a liquid tranquilliser prescribed in Mitchell Hooke's name that Hooke, the former CEO of the Minerals Council of Australia, acquired on his son-in-law's behalf. A drug test, for which Burgess allegedly used a false name, was subsequently ordered by South Sydney and conducted in the underground carpark of South's Juniors with Burgess testing positive for MDMA and ketamine. These allegations were contained in a 50-page police statement filed by Ms Burgess in September. Burgess, who denies any wrong doing, would step down from his coaching assistant duties at Souths and his Fox Sports commentary role while Souths would deny being part of any alleged cover-up. AS

DYSON HEYDON MAN rises to the absolute apex of his profession and decades later is exposed to have been a sex harasser. Who'd have thought it? That was the story of 77-year-old ex-High Court justice Dyson Heydon's 2020. In June an independent inquiry handed down its damning finding that Heydon sexually harassed six young female associates during his career. High Court Chief Justice Susan Keifel ordered the inquiry after two of Heydon's former associates blew the whistle on their former boss's creepy proclivities. Aggravating the embarrassment was that it happened when he was on duty for Australia's highest court. "We are ashamed that this could have happened at the High Court of Australia," said Chief Justice Kiefel in a statement. It was an astonishing fall from grace from one of the country's most revered legal minds. Things got worse for him after the release of the report with more people coming forward claiming to have been on the receiving end of similar treatment from Heydon. Heydon denied the inquiry's findings and had his lawyers issue a statement that included the following clarification: "Our client says that if any conduct of his has caused offence, that result was inadvertent and unintended, and he apologises for any offence caused." He added: "We have asked the High Court to convey that directly to the associate complainants." The ex-judge didn't stop there. He then transitioned onto the front foot and questioned the inquiry's credibility. ''The inquiry was an internal administrative inquiry and was conducted by a public servant and not by a lawyer, judge or a tribunal member. It was conducted without having statutory powers of investigation and of administering affirmations or oaths." Perhaps unsurprisingly, this did not change the inquiry's findings - or the public's reaction to them. BH

MEDIA HUGH MARKS HAVING confirmed the breakdown of his marriage in November, 2019, Nine media boss Hugh Marks kicked off 2020 with a new role after being appointed to the board of real estate business Domain Group (59 per cent owned by Nine). By March - refreshed by his annual trip to the Australian Open tennis in Melbourne the month earlier - Marks was forced to take an axe to Nine's drama slate along with children's productions. With Nine feeling the pinch along with other media companies due to the global advertising downturn, in August the company announced a substantial net loss. It came after Nine's streaming service, Stan, failed to win the contract for the most hotly contested international programming catalogue of the year, the rights to the WarnerMedia and HBO Max library (Games Of Thrones, Succession) going to Foxtel. This, in a year in which Stan also faced up to the loss of Disney programming to Disney+ but picked up rugby union. Marks was photographed picnicking in a Mosman park with his personal assistant in May. November brought his shock resignation after inquiries by this newspaper revealed the Nine CEO was in a relationship with a subordinate, newly departed managing director of commercial Alexi Baker. AS

ALAN JONES AFTER 35 years dominating Sydney talk radio on stations 2UE and 2GB, veteran broadcaster Alan Jones retired from radio in May - one year into a two-year contract - following an advertiser boycott that smashed Nine Radio's bottom line in 2019. It came after Jones took aim at New Zealand PM Jacinda Ardern and suggested Scott Morrison "shove a sock down her throat" after Ardern told a Pacific Island conference Australia would "have to answer to the Pacific" on climate change. Replaced by the younger Ben Fordham, the brother of Jones's manager, Jones soon announced he had signed a lucrative deal with TV broadcaster Sky News to host a weeknight prime time commentary program. He left 2GB in a blaze of glory with tributes from everyone from tennis star Roger Federer to actor Russell Crowe and billionaire James Packer. AS

CHRISTINE HOLGATE THE CEO of Australia Post came under fire in October after appearing before the Senate's Environment and Communications Committee to explain her decision to reward four executives in 2018 with Cartier watches. She told the committee the watches were gifted to four senior staff who had done an "inordinate amount of work" negotiating a contract that saw three of the four big banks agree to pay Australia Post, which operates like a publicly-owned business, $66m for providing financial services, a boost to the revenue streams of 3000 franchisees who run post offices. While Holgate denied taxpayers had paid for the watches - which totalled $20,000 and were paid for on a corporate credit card - PM Scott Morrison - unconcerned Australia Post is not federally funded - denounced the corporate gifts as "disgraceful" and demanded Holgate stand down, which she did. In November the humiliated Holgate resigned as reports surfaced suggesting Australia Post's chairman, Lucio Di Bartolomeo, failed to back his executive. An expensive report into the whole affair (and paid for by the taxpayer) was ordered by the PM and is yet to be released, with The Australian's Robert Gottliebsen reporting it found Holgate's actions justified but damned the government. AS

JAMES PACKER THE major shareholder of Crown Resorts Ltd spent 2020 in the sights of the NSW Independent Liquor and Gaming Authority after an inquiry was launched in January, 2020, to determine the billionaire's fitness to hold a casino licence in Sydney. Called to give evidence, a sweaty, halting Packer addressed the inquiry via video link from his luxury yacht in October and admitted threats he'd made towards a financier in 2015 were "shameful" and "disgraceful". He added strong medication makes it difficult for him to recall events. The inquiry, conducted by former Supreme Court judge Patricia Bergin - who is due to hand down her findings by February 1 -- was investigating evidence of money laundering at Crown's Melbourne casino and ties to junket tour operators linked to organised criminals. Bergin is examining whether Packer's casino violated strict ownership restrictions placed on the Barangaroo project when he attempted to sell almost half his stake in his casino business to Hong Kong businessman Lawrence Ho in 2019. With the $2.2bn Barangaroo casino opening delayed and Crown's Sydney licence in jeopardy, a possible merger between Crown and rival The Star is being talked up in Sydney while the Victorian government has ordered a probe into Packer's Melbourne operations. AS

CELEBRITIES ACTOR CHRIS HEMSWORTH ACTOR CHRIS HEMSWORTH NO global pandemic is going to get in the way of our homegrown superhero. It has been a big year for Byron Bay royalty Chris Hemsworth. When his action film Extraction was released in April it quickly became a hit for Netflix and despite mixed reviews from critics, it wrote itself into the streamer's history books as the most-watched original title ever. It was little wonder then that Netlfix execs moved quickly to secure Hemsworth's services and The Sunday Telegraph broke the news in September that the Thor star had signed a multi-million-dollar four-film contract with Netflix, including Extraction 2 and 3. He was instrumental in bringing production of the first movie - Spiderhead - to our shores and his latest Marvel instalment - Thor: Love And Thunder - has seen a cavalcade of stars, including Natalie Portman and Christian Bale, make Australia home temporarily. Hemsworth is working hard to promote Australia as a filming destination and it's believed he is agitating for more of his films to be made here. The unofficial face of beautiful Byron has also been doing his bit for the local tourism business which was decimated by COVID-19 lockdowns and, with actor wife Elsa Pataky, has been posting beautiful location shots with his family. DM

NICOLE KIDMAN WITH film and television production in Australia grinding to a halt earlier this year as the pandemic took hold, the industry was brought to its knees. Local margins are wafer thin at the best of times and this halt to filming across the country put many productions at risk and threatened the livelihood of the hundreds of actors and production staff involved in the industry. An injection of something, anything, was needed to keep the business alive and the first to step up to the plate and provide that was Nicole Kidman. When she announced she would be returning home to film her new series Nine Perfect Strangers in and around Byron Bay - she brought with her a massive $100m budget and a conga line of celebrities like Melissa McCarthy, Regina Hall, Luke Evans and Bobby Cannavale to our shores. Underlining the investment in local talent is the fact the series is based on the book by Sydney author Liane Moriarty. Of course, a single production could not provide work for everyone, but Kidman moved early and was the first in a long line of international productions taking advantage of our excellent COVID standing. If helping to save the local industry wasn't enough to get Kidman on the list of 50 Most Talked About People of 2020, she also fronted one of the most talked about thrillers of the year in The Undoing, an eight-part series that also stars Hugh Grant. It helped to break viewing records for streaming platform Binge and also saw the Aussie star's profile painted on the side of an 18- storey apartment block in Sydney. DM

CHEF AND TV PRESENTER PETE EVANS 2020 was the gift that kept giving, but in Pete Evans' case, it kept taking away. The year started off tame enough but then the pandemic hit. The TV chef who called coronavirus a 'scamdemic' on social media, went live on April 9 in front of a pink and purple hued disco lamp thing called a BioCharger which he was flogging for $14,900 on his website. He claimed it had a couple of recipes for "the Wuhan coronavirus in there" which earned him a $25,000 fine from the health watchdog. Evan's posting of ever more bizarre claims about paedophiles running the world, and his anti-vax views, was a recipe for career disaster. In May Seven's My Kitchen Rules parted ways with their star of 10 years. What followed was a 'Pauline Hanson moment' on 60 Minutes in June where he suggested if he disappeared evil forces were at play: "If I disappear in a weird freakin' accident, it wasn't an accident, OK?" As he announced he was working on a cannabis cookbook, he doubled down on 'toxins' in vaccines. He promoted land sales in an eco-commune that didn't have council approval and said he'd leave Facebook but never did. But it was his neo-Nazi post of a butterfly sporting the sonnenrad, the "sunwheel swastika", or black sun that cost him almost everything. Evans was "cancelled" as his cookbook publisher Pan Macmillan, bookstore Dymocks, BIG W, Coles, kitchenware company Baccarat, Woolworths, House homewares, Target, Kmart, Booktopia and David Jones distanced themselves as did Channel 10's I'm a Celebrity Get Me Out of Here. This week his official page was removed from Facebook. What was left was a man believing the whole thing had nothing to do with his posts and everything to do with a giant media conspiracy to shut him up. JH

PROMOTER MICHAEL GUDINSKI WHEN the gigs stopped in March the music industry got busy online. Promoter Michael Gudinski knew artists and arts workers needed a sense of purpose to get through the pandemic shutdown and their financial uncertainty and that fans isolated in their homes could do with some spirit boosting. His first big virtual gig was the wildly ambitious Music From The Home Front virtual concert on Anzac Day night featuring "live" performances from Jimmy Barnes and family, Missy Higgins and Tim Minchin and dozens of orchestra members and singers. That success inspired him to put his money where his mouth has been for years, lamenting the lack of live music on Australian TV and in the middle of COVID-19, he launched new show The Sound, which completed two seasons worth of unforgettable performances from Midnight Oil to Ruel. KMc

RAPPER THE KID LAROI CHARLTON Howard, the 17-year-old First Nations rapper and singer from Sydney, became Australia's first bona fide global hip hop star. The Kid Laroi was mentored by the late chart slayer Juice Wrld and the posthumous release of their collab track Go was the Australian artist's first to land on the US Billboard charts. Kid Laroi's debut mixtake F… Love peaked at No 3 in Australia and the US, propelled by a succession of killer tracks including Tell My Why, So Done and Without You. Now based in LA with his family, the prodigiously talented artist has generated more than one billion streams over the past year. KMc

ACTOR HUGH SHERIDAN AFTER returning to Australia from the US, actor Hugh Sheridan initially tested negative and then positive on August 28 for coronavirus. On September 2 while in quarantine he told his social media followers it was "scary, frustrating and lonely" though he had, he said, no symptoms. Then two days later an update: Sheridan's latest test was negative and doctors believed his previous test had been a false positive. Then in October, Sheridan, a household name since starring in Channel 7's Packed To The Rafters penned a letter for Stellar magazine in which the 35-year-old said he wanted to be the person who "sticks up for people who don't pick a label". He then announced he was coming out "as a human being" and revealed he'd been bullied at school and called "faggot". The actor said he had had relationships with both sexes. Not everyone praised him for his declaration with some gays incensed that Sheridan hadn't stood with them at an earlier stage. It wasn't until it was revealed the following month that Sheridan had been cast in the lead role of the musical Hedwig and The Angry Inch for the forthcoming 2021 Sydney Festival that his critics really emerged - and they weren't homophobic straights and they weren't shunned gays either. They were a furious trans community who felt the role - of genderqueer rock singer from Germany who has a botched sex change operation and is left with an "angry inch" should have gone to a transgender performer. To the offended Queer Artist Alliance Australia, Sheridan - despite having just outed himself as a "human" nonbinary LGBT member - didn't have what it takes. As a result, the acclaimed show was cancelled and Sheridan admitted to hospital. Last week he told The Sunday Telegraph this was to deal with an "anxiety attack" due to an overloaded schedule. AS

SINGER GUY SEBASTIAN THE Choir chart star continued to dominate the Australian airwaves with its sister single, Standing With You, proving to be another top 10 hit. The pop star and television personality found out who his industry friends were when some peers sought to cancel him for sharing a stage with the PM during an arts grants package announce. And his offstage drama continued when his Federal Court fight with former manager Titus Day became a criminal matter with the talent wrangler facing 61 fraud charges. But for all the drama, Sebastian saw out 2020 with his ninth album, T.R.U.T.H, heading straight to No.1 on release in October and recommitting to his The Voice coach spot for the Seven reboot of the series. KMc

MUSICIAN TONES AND I THE Dance Monkey superstar continued to set new chart records around the world through 2020 with her unstoppable breakout song. Tones and I was the most streamed female artist on Spotify for the year, an achievement she celebrated by pointing out she didn't need a dozen American hitmakers to help her write a smash. During the pandemic shutdown, she devoted her energies to supporting emerging artists with That One Song contest which featured a new original song over 20 days. And then she released her own next big hit Fly Away in November, which was already well over 20 million streams before Christmas. KMc

THE INTERNATIONALS US PRESIDENT AND VICE PRESIDENT ELECT JOE BIDEN AND KAMALA HARRIS WHEN the polls closed on US election day in November, it looked like Donald Trump had defied the odds and would secure himself a second term over Democratic contender Joe Biden and his running mate, Kamala Harris. After winning the Democratic nomination following a bitterly contested primary campaign, Biden had chosen Harris as his pick for VP and the two set about to make history - he as the oldest president and she as the first African American vice-president. With the US in the grip of the deadly coronavirus pandemic, Biden-Harris launched a massive campaign to get people to vote; and vote early. For minorities that simple right can be a financial and logistical nightmare - voting is on a Tuesday and it is not a declared public holiday. As was expected the gloves came off during the campaign. There were accusations of sexual misconduct levelled at Biden - which he denied - there were claims levelled against Biden's son, Hunter, of using his father's name and allegedly promising access to make millions. As the count slowly continued through election night, it looked like the dirt might have stuck. But then the postal votes count started - the ones the Biden-Harris camp had urged people to use so they could have their say. Those glued to CNN or Fox News watched as Trump's big leads were slowly eroded and eventually overtaken and the history books again were rewritten. DM

OUTGOING US PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP SINCE taking office in January, 2017, Donald Trump's time as commander in chief has been a wild ride, but in 2020 the roller coaster seemed to fly off the rails. His failure to fully comprehend, and react to, the pandemic left the US positioned as one of the worst affected on the planet. In February he mocked the severity of the virus and in March said "no nation is more prepared or more resilient than the United States" before later saying he wouldn't be wearing a mask and stressing to people that CDC's advice to wear masks was voluntary. Things took an even stranger turn when he appeared to suggest disinfectant could be injected into people to knock it out. There have been more than 18 million cases and hundreds of thousands of deaths from COVID-19. The outgoing president also failed to address the rapidly growing Black Lives Matter movement that swept the nation in response to a growing number of deaths of black men and women at the hands of police officers, instead fuelling the fire by refusing to engage and preferring to label them violent thugs as a whole. Since losing the election to Joe Biden in November, Trump has cried foul from the rooftops, calling the election rigged and taking his fight to every court in the land to try to get votes discounted. To this day he continues to claim he won the vote in a landslide and refused to acknowledge the incoming chief. DM BRITISH PM BORIS JOHNSON BREXIT negotiations must have seemed a walk in the park for the British PM when he was hit with COVID crisis in early 2020. First his government stood accused of being too slow to react to the crisis as social distancing, school closures, stay-home orders and testing initiatives lagged behind those of many other countries. Then Johnson became a high-profile victim of the virus in late March, his worsening condition prompting his admission to intensive care. Better news came with the arrival of his son with partner Carrie Symons shortly after. The remainder of 2020 has unfolded in similar fashion for the British PM, with good news around vaccine development tempered by burgeoning case numbers and new restrictions for the festive season.

ACTOR CHADWICK BOSEMAN WHEN news broke in late August that Black Panther star Chadwick Boseman had died, there was an outpouring of shock and grief from all walks of life. Fellow actors, pillars of the business community and world leaders paid tribute. The announcement of his passing on Twitter was the most liked tweet in the platform's history. Boseman was not just an actor - he had become a beacon of hope to generations of fans across the globe and was proof that anything was possible if you put your heart and mind to it. It was revealed he had secretly been battling colon cancer since 2016. Initially assessed as stage III, the disease worsened to stage IV and he underwent numerous surgeries all while maintaining his busy filming schedule. He was best known for being a superhero on the big screen, but his most heroic actions were away from the cameras. Boseman worked tirelessly with black youth in encouraging and guiding them to reach heights they may not have thought possible. After the actor's death, former US president Barack Obama paid tribute to his work. "You could tell right away that he was blessed. To be young, gifted, and Black; to use that power to give them heroes to look up to; to do it all while in pain - what a use of his years," he said. DM

TV HOST ELLEN DEGENERES FOR years, Ellen DeGeneres and her eponymous daytime talk show were synonymous with fun and positivity. There was dancing, music, hilarious games and a guest list only Oprah could top. But on the inside, a molten toxicity was slowly bubbling towards the surface, one that erupted in the most spectacular fashion and threatened to ruin its star in the process. Cracks started to appear in March when comedian Kevin T Porter called DeGeneres "notoriously one of the meanest people alive" on Twitter and invited others to share their horror stories about the TV star. There was an avalanche of replies and some wild tales but given the forum it was impossible to tell if they were real. In May, a former bodyguard told of how the host was "cold" and "demeaning". Then in July, Buzzfeed News published a report in which current and past employees spoke of a toxic workplace culture, racism and harassment. There were reports of sexual misconduct by an executive producer who was fired along with two others in the wake of an investigation by Warner Bros. The show has restarted but there are reports ratings are down, sponsors have shied away and A-listers are staying away. DM

BASKETBALLER MICHAEL JORDAN THE legend surrounding the world's greatest basketball player has never really dissipated since his third retirement from the game almost 20 years ago. The basketball Jordan - and even the slightly cringe-worthy baseball Jordan - were alive and well. But with the release of the documentary series The Last Dance we got to see the psychology behind all that public-facing stuff. The Jordan name once again became the headline. Hours and hours of unseen footage was used to craft this 10-part series that focused on Jordan and the Chicago Bulls during the 1997-98 NBA season. This was intertwined with present-day interviews with the cigar-smoking star talking about what it was like to be one of the most competitive sportspeople alive. There was a lot of Jordan's brain in this series and while a lot of it wasn't particularly flattering, all of it was fascinating. DM

ACTORS JOHNNY DEPP AND AMBER HEARD THE who's who of Hollywood splash a lot of cash to keep their private lives - and their secrets - private. So, there was global interest in a case being played out inside a London courtroom involving one of the highest paid actors in Tinseltown. Johnny Depp was suing the UK's Sun newspaper for libel after it called him a "wife beater" in relation to alleged abuse against ex-wife Amber Heard. Claims of a troubled drug and alcohol fuelled lifestyle were put forward together with details about serious domestic abuse (that Depp denies) and violent fights between the former couple. There was destroyed property, severed finger tips and in one particularly foul piece of oversharing, claims of giant faeces deposits on a bed. The court ruled in favour of the newspaper which meant it found the accusations were 'substantially true'. The fallout was swift. Depp admitted he was asked to exit the Fantastic Beasts franchise after losing the case. His lawyers have signalled they will appeal the decision and there is another case in the US against Heard over an opinion piece she penned for The Washington Post. DM

ROYALS HARRY AND MEGHAN THIS time last year the royal spare and his actor wife should have been enjoying their first Christmas with their seven-month old son, Archie. But the festive spirit was not enough to deflect nasty criticism of Meghan, who was accused of photoshopping her face in the black and white photo. And that was just a taster of what was to come when the royal couple announced in early January that they would be relinquishing their roles as "senior" members of the royal family. Megxit instantly became one of THE words of 2020, inducted into the online edition of the Collins English Dictionary no less. "The decision that I have made for my wife and I to step back is not one I made lightly ... there really was no other option," Prince Harry would later stay. As commentators forensically examined who was at fault, the couple made their escape, first to Canada, then to California where they have since bought a home. Mega content deals with Netflix and Spotify followed as the couple forged ahead with a life plan that not even the most fanciful writers of The Crown could do justice to.
---
THE COVID FILES Chinese scientists linked to virus probe worked in Australia

TWO Chinese scientists - who Western intelligence agencies are looking into as part of their probe into the origins of the global coronavirus contagion - studied live bats in Australia in research jointly funded by the Australian and Chinese governments. An investigation by The Daily Telegraph can reveal the Five Eyes intelligence agencies of Australia, Canada, NZ, UK and US, are understood to be looking closely at the work of a senior scientist at the Wuhan Institute of Virology, Peng Zhou, and fellow scientist Shi Zhengli, as they examine whether COVID-19 originated from a wet market or whether the naturally-occurring virus may have been inadvertently released from a level four laboratory in Wuhan.FULL REPORT PAGES 2-3


---
China is playing a dangerous propaganda game as it seeks to avoid responsibility for the coronavirus crisis, writes James Morrow

So, who's going to pay for all this?

That's the trillion-dollar question swirling around the globe as reserve banks fire money into their economies, countless millions of people hole up in varying degrees of isolation and quarantine, and the world comes to a standstill waiting for a cure or vaccine or some hopeful glimmer of a return to normality.

The impact goes way beyond the financial.

Around the planet careers are being shattered, businesses - particularly - are crashing out, educations are being delayed, lives are being put on hold, and no one knows what the next wave of news will bring.

And, tragically, more than 10,000 people have died, with an unknown number more potentially infected.

Not surprising then that as doctors are coping with tsunamis of patients or preparing for waves yet to arrive, lawyers and lawmakers are beginning to ask whether or not there is some way to make the Chinese government pay a price for mismanaging the coronavirus crisis and letting it be loosed upon the world.

In the US state of Florida the Berman Law Group has put in motion a class-action lawsuit against the People's Republic of China, alleging the Chinese government "knew that COVID-19 was dangerous and capable of causing a pandemic, yet slowly acted, proverbially put their head in the sand, and/or covered it up for their own economic self-interest." Speaking on Fox News this week, Indiana congressman Jim Banks said the US needed to "hold China accountable for their bad behaviour", suggesting that "we need to start by forcing China to pay the burden and the cost incurred on the United States of America due to the coronavirus." Experts are divided on whether such pushes have any chance of success but it signals a new phase in the coronavirus crisis in which the People's Republic of China furiously attempts to rewrite history to portray itself as the hero of this story, rather than an institution whose baked-in recklessness has brought the world to a halt.

MADE IN CHINA While there are a number of theories about how specifically the virus came to be, most leading experts believe the virus emerged from one of Wuhan's so-called "wet markets" where exotic wildlife including pangolins are sold and slaughtered for human consumption - activity which has caused this sort of problem before.

After the 2003 SARS outbreak, which is thought to have originated in similar circumstances, "Chinese experts strongly recommended that those markets be shut down along with the wild animal trade", Clive Hamilton, whose 2018 book Silent Invasion warned of the creeping influence and danger of Chinese Communist Party influence campaigns in Australia, told The Saturday Telegraph.

"But the people who benefit the most from the markets, the wealthy elite who like to eat these things, they lobbied against the closing," says Hamilton.

There also remains darker speculation that the coronavirus may have escaped from China's National Biosafety Laboratory in Wuhan, the country's only "biosafety level 4" lab - so certified because it is, supposedly, able to deal with the world's most dangerous pathogens safely.

Though often dismissed as conspiracy mongering, adherents to this notion point to a New York Post report that a day after Chinese leader Xi Jinping held an emergency meeting in February on how to control the coronavirus, the Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology released a new directive titled: "Instructions on strengthening biosecurity management in microbiology labs that handle advanced viruses like the novel coronavirus."

COMMUNIST COVER-UP No matter where the virus originated, one thing virtually all experts agree on: The coronavirus outbreak that started in Wuhan and has now swept its way across every continent save for Antarctica was made exponentially worse by the Chinese government's totalitarian culture of secrets and lies that puts the reputation of the party above the health of the entire planet.

What's worse, now that the genie is out of the bottle, they're trying to lie their way out of it. The government in Beijing is now, through an army of propagandists, working hard to spin the global pandemic not as a disaster, but rather a triumph, of the Chinese system's ability to swing into action.

When this newspaper ran a report this week detailing allegations that the Chinese government censored reports and destroyed lab samples in an effort to cover up the virus, the People's Republic's Sydney Consulate General fired off a letter slamming the story as "groundless" and "seriously distorted." The letter went on to claim that "since the outbreak of the coronavirus epidemic, China has consistently put people's safety and health first and adopted the most comprehensive, strict and thorough prevention and control measures" and that "the Chinese government has taken an open, transparent and highly responsible attitude in informing about the epidemic both domestically and globally in a timely manner".

"There is already an information struggle going on with the Chinese government using its foreign ministry spokespeople and embassies to cast the Chinese model of government as uniquely successful because of their management of COVID-19", says Michael Shoebridge, director of the Defence, Strategy & National Security program at the Australian Strategic Policy Institute (ASPI) in Canberra.

"That would be a masterful piece of Orwellian history writing to achieve, because without the Chinese government's suppression of doctors reporting the novel virus, the world would have had a chance of containing it in Wuhan," he says.

Paul Dibb, emeritus professor of Strategic Studies at ANU's Strategic & Defence Studies Centre, agrees blame for the disaster can and should be laid squarely at the feet of the Chinese Communist Party.

"Let's go back to the fundamental issue: China as an authoritarian communist country," Dibb says.

"As usual (in this sort of system) they have lied about it or refused to face up to the facts." "The were warned well in advance by a doctor in Wuhan, who received the classic punishment of being told 'how dare you spread lies like that', and he subsequently died," he adds, referring to ophthalmologist Li Wenliang who did his best to sound the alarm that a new severe respiratory disease was spreading, was reprimanded, and subsequently died in early February.

And by covering up - rather than dealing with - the problem Chinese officials made it exponentially worse.

A study released Thursday by the University of Southampton in the UK found that by the end of February, there were 114,325 coronavirus cases in China and that had officials leapt on the problem earlier, the spread of the disease could have been contained, by as much as 95 per cent.

According to the researchers: "If interventions in the country could have been conducted one week, two weeks, or three weeks earlier, cases could have been reduced by 66 per cent, 86 per cent and 95 per cent respectively - significantly limiting the geographical spread of the disease." Rather than learn from their mistakes, this pattern of lies and deception is continuing today, says Dibb, as Chinese officials spread the lie that COVID-19 was actually a creation of the US Army, spread by American athletes who were in Wuhan in October last year for the Military World Games.

According to Dibb, the conspiracy theory has been pushed by Chinese officials as high ranking as the country's foreign minister Wang Yi, whom Dibb points out also tried to heavy Julie Bishop when she was serving in the Turnbull government.

Last week China's Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian fired off a furious tirade on Twitter, ranting, "When did patient zero begin in US? How many people are infected? What are the names of the hospitals? It might be US army who brought the epidemic to Wuhan. Be transparent! Make public your data! US owe us an explanation!" It was this suggestion that led US President Donald Trump to, this week, make a specific point of referring to "the China virus" in front of a roomful of reporters.

While this led some commentators to join with Chinese officials in charging Trump with racism, Trump's comments remain accurate given the longstanding convention that new diseases bear the name of their place of origin.

"They are insistent that this should not be China coronavirus, fine, call it the Wuhan coronavirus", says Dibb.

In all this the Chinese government has been aided and abetted in this by its seemingly surprising ally, the World Health Organisation (WHO), headed by director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus (inset), which in the early weeks of the crisis praised China's efforts while downplaying the threat and refusing to declare a pandemic.

This, says Hamilton, is evidence of how the once-respected global public health body has slowly but surely been brought into Beijing's orbit as just another propaganda mouthpiece.

"For some years the WHO has been under the growing influence of the Chinese Communist Party and was in the early weeks of the crisis bending over backwards to keep Beijing happy" says Hamilton.

"As a result in the early weeks of the crisis the WHO was reproducing the misleading messages of the party - reassuring the world that this wasn't a big problem - when in fact it should have been warning the world and getting accurate information rather than relying on information filtered by Chinese government and party officials." The end result is that the WHO's credibility is now in tatters, says Hamilton. "The reputation of the WHO has been trashed over the last two months, as has that of its director general, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus."

WHERE TO NEXT While it is hard to see any legal action against the Chinese government succeeding - Beijing, after all, laughed in the face of 2016 ruling in The Hague against its expansion into the South China Sea - once the coronavirus crisis passes, Western governments and businesses will radically recast their relationship with middle kingdom.

This process of reducing Western nations' and companies' dependence on China is known as 'decoupling', and it has been taking place since at least the Trump administration began taking its harder line with Beijing.

Perversely says Salvatore Babones, an adjunct scholar at the Centre for Independent Studies, China may attempt to turn this process to its advantage. After the crisis passes, says Babones, "increasingly there will be a China orbit and a Western orbit, and China will use that to further its agenda".

Their dream is to be the one-stop manufacturing shop for the world, as the US was through most of the second half of the last century, Babones says, "but I doubt they'll succeed".

Either way, ASPI's Michael Shoebridge says that the old order is rapidly changing, and that Australia must know who its friends are - and stick with them.

"This is a bigger deal than just China or US-China relations and engagement. It's about rethinking the basic assumptions of globalisation and revaluing the ability to produce essential items - including medical supplies, food and fuel - in our own nations and in trusted partners. Simple nationalism is a risk here, with a better path being integration with trusted partners", says Shoebridge."For Australia, that includes at a minimum Indonesia, the US, Japan and our South Pacific neighbours."
---
TIES between Australian researchers and the Chinese military need to be stopped in the interests of national security, according to National Party Senator Matt Canavan.

He said recent reports within Australia and from around the world had raised serious concerns about co-operation with Chinese government-connected researchers.

An exclusive report in The Daily Telegraph recently outlined how China's People's Liberation Army has been involved in scientific research, co-funded by the Australian government, into the origins of the coronavirus which has been published in esteemed medical journals.

In an explosive revelation, a study co-funded by the Australian Research Council and the Chinese government, and trumpeted by The University of Sydney as helping to solve the puzzle of how COVID-19 transferred from animals to humans, relied on a key laboratory in an institute in the People's Liberation Army's Academy of Military Medical Sciences to conduct its "genetic sequencing" and "virus isolation". The director of the microbiology institute, Professor Wu-Chan Cao has the rank of colonel and is a Wuhan Institute of Virology board member. Mr Canavan told Sky News commentator Sharri Markson co-operation between Chinese government researchers and Australian scientists should be stopped. "Your reports along with several others ... over the past year have raised serious concerns about (how) the ... joint research between China and other western nations is being (used) for potentially military, counter intelligence applications and in this case, in terms, of health as well," Mr Canavan said. "I think the reports are serious enough that we should suspend research co-operation with Chinese government-connected researchers."
---
HUNT FOR THE CURE

GERM detectives and scientists have uncovered genetic mutations in coronavirus clusters circulating throughout Australia, giving them a chance to move a step ahead of the disease.

The breakthrough by Doherty Institute scientists and Victorian Department of Health contact tracers is vital to limiting the spread of community transmission of COVID-19.

By tracking the different mutations, specialists cannot only pinpoint the country a person's individual coronavirus infection originated from, but home in on the hospital, aged care centre, cruise or other local source they are linked to.

Armed with the new genomic sequencing, Associate Professor Deborah Williamson said contact tracers around Australia could identify everyone likely to be linked to a cluster, even if they did not have symptoms.

The genetic information also provides a clue where each cluster is likely to spread next, allowing more targeted isolation to stop each COVID-19 outbreak - which is needed to ease wider restrictions on the entire population.

"We are seeing clusters related to different outbreaks in different parts of the world," Assoc Prof Williamson said.

"The benefits are going to be in monitoring things like outbreaks in hospitals, outbreaks in aged care facilities, and looking at potential community transmission.

"If we did find there was an outbreak in a certain part of the community, then they could direct resources to that such as contact tracing, testing of those in that risk network." The Melbourne-based Doherty Institute is at the forefront of global efforts to find a COVID-19 cure. While its genomic sequencing will not overcome the virus, combining the information with the epidemiological work of contact tracers could be a key to restoring freedoms.

The findings are also being shared with scientists around the world to further research, as well as increase the data available to Australian trace detectives. After identifying subtle differences hidden among the 30,000 characters in the genetic code of two coronavirus clusters circulating in Victoria, contact tracing detectives have already used the genomic sequencing technique to stop each spreading in recent weeks.

The Institute's scientists have now pored over samples from hundreds of COVID-19 patients to genetically sequence each person's infection, identifying telltale mutations in coronavirus imported from each country.

Despite the slowing curve, Australia's COVID-19 peak is still possibly ahead and Assoc Prof Williamson said it was vital all states began collecting samples to build up a complete set of sequencing before community transmission took off.

With a full set of sequencing data, any new cases emerging in the community could be instantly traced back to their origins to identify others unknowingly caught up in the cluster, or those who are about to be if they are not isolated.

"It's no good sequencing a few genomes just from one hospital, or from one outbreak. To get a proper handle on what's going on we need to be sequencing all of the genomes not just in Victoria, but in all of Australia," Assoc Prof Williamson said.

While genome sequencing has been used in Victoria to trace the source and get ahead of well-established infectious diseases such as salmonella and tuberculosis for the past five years, identifying COVID-19 mutations has been much more difficult for scientists around the globe.

Because the novel coronavirus only emerged four months ago its mutations have not had long to separate to a point where they are easily distinguishable.

But using powerful computers to overlay hundreds of samples from COVID-19 patients highlighted the smallest differences in the nucleotides of the RNA genome in patients already known to belong to certain clusters, providing a framework to identify related cases.

The COVID-19 mutations identified so far are not thought to provide an indication of the severity of each strain, but Assoc Prof Williamson said work was continuing to identify more differences as well as their role.

"It's easy to forget that four-and-a-half months ago we didn't even know this thing existed," she said.

"We are trying to cram years of expertise and knowledge into a few short months. "Every day we are learning something new about not just a virus, but ways to detect the virus, ways to control the outbreak."

NATIONAL COVID-19 HOT SPOTS WHERE GENOME MUTATION TRACKING COULD STOP THE SPREAD QUEENSLAND ■ North Brisbane 309 ■ South Brisbane 239 ■ Gold Coast 188 ■ Sunshine Coast 89

NSW ■ Blacktown 106 ■ Byron Bay 16 ■ Cumberland 66 ■ Tamworth 12 ■ Sydney Eastern Suburbs 261 ■ Penrith 10 ■ Lake Macquarie 54 ■ Ryde 66

ACT ■ Tuggeranong 23 ■ South Canberra 17 ■ Gungahlin 17

TASMANIA ■ North West Tasmania 97

VICTORIA ■ Stonnington 87 ■ Banyule 82 ■ Greater Geelong 62 ■ Melbourne 61

SOUTH AUSTRALIA ■ Barossa Valley 40 ■ Adelaide Airport 34

WESTERN AUSTRALIA ■ Greater Perth region 403 ■ Broome 11 ■ Albany 7 ■ Kalgoorlie 6 ■ Halls Creek 4

DEFINITION The case definition of a confirmed case is a person who tests positive to a validated specific SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid test or has the virus identified by electron microscopy or viral culture, at a reference laboratory. The details on source of infection are subject to change as public health investigations and case interviews are ongoing.

GENOMICSGenomics is the study of whole genomes of organisms. It analyses the building blocks of cells such as DNA and RNA through sequencing to decode the fundamental structure and function of genomes. Genomic research has already been used to develop better understanding, tracking and defences against bacteria and viruses including meningococcal disease, salmonella, tuberculosis and cytomegalovirus, a member of the herpes family. Decoding can reveal mutations and allow scientists to act quickly to identify and isolate the source of the disease.
---
WHO TAKES BEIJING'S SIDE IN HASTY COVID INQUIRY 5 years Length of Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sex Abuse 10 months Length of Warren Commission investigation into JFK's assassination 12 days World Health Organisation on-ground team's investigation into the origins of COVID-19 pandemic THE World Health Organisation's hurried report into the origins of the coronavirus was slammed as an "unsatisfactory" whitewash designed to protect the Chinese government from embarrassment, just hours after handing down its findings.

Speaking in China on Tuesday night, WHO investigators dismissed the possibility that the virus may have escaped from the controversial Wuhan Institute of Vir-ology while leaving the door open to the possibility that the virus may have been imported from another country.

Peter Embarek, one of the scientists who made up the delegation, said finding the origin of COVID was a "work in progress".

But he said COVID-19 most likely made the jump to humans through an unknown animal source.

The theory that the virus may have escaped from a local lab where scientists were known to be conducting "gain of function" tests on -viruses similar to the coronavirus was dismissed out of hand as "extremely unlikely", according to Embarek.

But more needs to be known before the possibility can be dismissed, according to a number of scientists and experts critical of China's handling of the pandemic.

"It's unsatisfactory, dismissing possibilities without providing evidence for why," said vaccine researcher Prof Nikolai Petrovski, who is the Director of Endocrinology at Flinders University Medical Centre in South Australia.

"They seem to have signed up to the Chinese government's position, which is that this didn't come from China, and that it might have come in to China on frozen food packaging. Why are they -saying that and what is the evidence?" "We are entitled to the facts they are using to dismiss different possibilities, and to know if they have dealt with the question marks around how the virus got this feature or that feature." Others were similarly sceptical.

"The WHO mission is compromised because Beijing is choreographing the team's visit. And the delegation -includes some China apologists," academic and author Clive Hamilton, who has written a number of books detailing the efforts of the Chinese Communist Party to subvert democracy in Australia and around the world, told The Daily Telegraph.

"It already looks like the WHO delegation is following Beijing's script." UNSW Professor Raina MacIntyre also said it was "expected" the WHO investigators would rule out the lab as where COVID-19 started, but that didn't mean it was the case.

"They do not provide any evidence for dismissing a lab leak," she said. Since the beginning of the pandemic, the Chinese government has tightly controlled information about the virus that could be embarrassing to the authoritarian regime, and suggested the virus might have been brought to Wuhan by visiting American military athletes or even on the surface of imported frozen food packaging.

China has also sought to punish Australian exporters by imposing billions of dollars worth of trade sanctions in retaliation for the Morrison government's pressing for an investigation into the -pandemic.

Nationals Senator Matt Canavan lashed the process, suggesting that any report into the virus delivered on Chinese soil was immediately compromised.

"It's a bit hard to believe the conclusions of this report when if the WHO had made certain findings, they may have been detained before -getting out of the country," he said.

"If journalists expressing views aren't safe in China, how can you expect health officials to be safe either?" Other Coalition MPs were just as scathing, with one -telling The Daily Telegraph it was "premature" to rule out the lab hypothesis "before they have found clear evidence of an alternative cause".

From the start, the WHO's investigation has been marred by controversy, with the Chinese government first delaying authorisation for the visit, and then tightly man-aging access for the inter-national delegation.

Despite the WHO's report, the theory that COVID-19's origins lie behind the gates of the secretive Wuhan Institute of Virology have gained currency in -recent days after being widely rubbished as a Donald Trump-style conspiracy theory when The Daily Telegraph reported on it last year.  Last week, the Washington Post published a blistering editorial saying that "the possibility of a laboratory -accident or leak … must be -investigated ... Wuhan (has) at least six facilities with BSL-3 laboratories for handling infectious agents," the paper's editorial board wrote. And, soon after the WHO handed down its report, former US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo told Fox News in an interview: "I continue to know that there was significant evidence that this may well have come from that -laboratory."
---
DATABASE COVER-UP RECORDS CENSORED AS NEWS BROKE

DAYS before the Wuhan wet market was bleached, whistleblowers punished and virus samples destroyed, someone at the high-security Wuhan Institute of Virology (WIV) censored its virus database.

Revealed by open source intelligence uncovered in the UK, it was an apparent attempt to dissociate the laboratory from a novel coronavirus outbreak that would become a global pandemic.

Substantial alterations to the WIV database on the evening of December 30, the day before the World Health Organisation was alerted to the outbreak of a cluster of pneumonia cases in Wuhan, are just another indication that the Chinese Communist Party is hiding something when it comes to the origins of COVID-19.

The question of whether the virus came from the Wuhan wet market, as China insists, or inadvertently leaked from the nearby WIV laboratory, where high-risk research into animal-to-human transmission of bat coronaviruses was being conducted, is at the centre of cover-up allegations and a worldwide clamour for an independent investigation into source of the disease.

Shi Zhengli, the virologist known as China's "Bat Woman" for her work with bat coronaviruses, directs the WIV's Center for Emerging Infectious Diseases and is listed as the primary database contact.

On December 30, she was in Shanghai for a conference when she was summoned back to Wuhan with the news that a novel coronavirus had been detected in two pneumonia patients.

On the overnight train from Shanghai, according to a March article in Scientific American, she was stricken with worry about the coronaviruses.

"Could they have come from our lab?" she wondered.

After all, the closest known relative of this new coronavirus, a bat virus named RaTG13, was in her lab.

Weeks later, she would post a message on WeChat saying, "I swear with my life, [the virus] has nothing to do with the lab." But, at some point that night, while she was on the train to Wuhan, alterations were made to her database, which contained records of bat viruses transmitted to other wild animals.

Most of the changes were to delete the keywords "wildlife" or "wild animals". This is significant because global health researchers say the virus jumped from bats to humans via another wild animal - the crucial "missing link in the COVID-19 transmission chain.

Dr Shi used to boast her bat virus database was unique because it included data on virus variants in other wild animals.

Analysts have questioned if her database was censored to keep prying eyes away from references to cross-species transmission of viruses in wild animals.

For instance, the title of the database was changed that night from "Wildlife-borne Viral Pathogen Database" to "Bat and rodent-borne viral pathogen database". "Wild animal" was replaced with "bat and rodent" or "bat and rat" at least 10 times in the database. A reference to "arthropod vectors" also was removed.

Key words which might facilitate searches potentially connecting the database with the outbreak also were deleted. "Wild animal samples", "viral pathogen data", "emerging infectious diseases" and "cross-species infection" were keywords associated with the original version.

On December 30 they were replaced with "bat", "rodent" and "virus". "It looks like a rushed, inconsistent effort to disassociate the project from the outbreak by rebranding it," says the British open source intelligence analyst who found the alterations.

"It's a strange thing to do within hours of being informed of a novel coronavirus outbreak".

He surmises that: "If the WIV had found the missing link between bat virus RaTG13 and SARS-CoV-2 [the virus that causes COVID-19] from an animal vector, it would have been in Shi's database".

While there's no conclusive evidence that the changes were made for sinister reasons, they add weight to claims of a Chinese cover-up.

"This is an enormous crisis created by the fact that the Chinese Communist Party reverted to form, reverted to the kinds of disinformation, the kinds of concealment, that authoritarian regimes do," US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo said on Sunday.

"There is enormous evidence that [the Wuhan lab] is where this began … These are not the first times that we've had a world exposed to viruses as a result of failures in a Chinese lab." Yesterday Pompeo walked back his comments slightly. "We don't have certainty," he said. "We're all trying to get to clarity." China's refusal to allow an investigation of the origins of the Wuhan virus, or even to share original virus samples, has impeded the search for treatments and a vaccine."The CCP organisational and governmental culture is to cover up and ruthlessly control," says a retired senior Australian intelligence officer who served in China. "The arrest of frontline health professionals in January was standard practice." Early in the outbreak authorities arrested a group of medical professionals for "spreading rumours".
---
THE World Health Organisation conceded its handling of the COVID-19 pandemic must be reviewed, as it continued to defend the way China managed the virus yesterday.

The regional director of the World Health Organisation (WHO) in the Pacific Dr Takeshi Kasai (pictured) told a public briefing its expert committee had initially been divided on whether to declare the disease outbreak a public health emergency.

However, he said the organisation had been in constant contact with China after it revealed it had an outbreak of a cluster of pneumonia cases of unknown cause.

"We as organisations, we try our best to, as quickly as possible and then as transparently as possible to respond to these diseases but we have to review later and we need to be evaluated later," he said.

He defended China's transparency in sharing the make-up of the virus with WHO. The concession came as Prime Minister Scott Morrison has backed an independent international inquiry into the origins of coronavirus while claiming it would not be a criticism of China.

"It's not pursued as an issue of criticism, it's pursued as an issue of importance for public health," he said.

The WHO has come in for major criticism for being too slow to act and US President Donald Trump has withdrawn funding from the body claiming it was too China-centric.

The president has called for an investigation into whether the virus escaped from a laboratory in Wuhan.China has been criticised for initially suppressing information on the virus spread.
---
EXCLUSIVE Aussie link to China military lab

CHINA'S People's Liberation Army has been involved in scientific research - co-funded by the Australian government - into the origins of the coronavirus.

In an explosive revelation, a study co-funded by the Australian Research Council and the Chinese government - and trumpeted by The University of Sydney as helping to unlock the genetic code of COVID-19 - relied on a laboratory in one of the institutes in the People's Liberation Army's Academy of Military Medical Sciences to conduct its "genetic sequencing" and "virus isolation".

The director of this microbiology institute, Professor Wu-Chan Cao, who is thanked in the paper's acknowledgments for his "substantial contribution", has the rank of colonel and is also a Wuhan Institute of Virology board member - the same facility at the centre of a global probe into whether the naturally-occurring coronavirus was accidentally released from its laboratory or came from a local wet market. The study is one of two scientific papers on the coronavirus undertaken by University of Sydney virologist and evolutionary biologist, Professor Edward Holmes.FULL REPORT PAGES 4-5
---
THE COVID FILES RESEARCH LINKS LIBERAL MP Sarah Henderson says all virus research with foreign nationals should be stopped until a safety and national security review is done.

The call from a member of the Morrison government follows revelations by The Daily Telegraph that the CSIRO's bio-containment facility in Geelong, Victoria has been engaging in research, jointly funded by the Australian and Chinese governments, in conjunction with the Wuhan Institute of Virology which is now the centre of a global probe into the origins of the COVID-19 outbreak. Ms Henderson told The Daily Telegraph the partnership was "very concerning" from a security and safety perspective.

"I am calling on the CSIRO's Australian Animal Health Laboratory - now known as the Australian Centre for Disease Preparedness - to conduct a full review into its virus research program involving foreign nationals so as to consider all of the national security and biosecurity risks," "This sort of research involving foreign nationals should be put on hold until the review is conducted." Ms Henderson spoke of major security concerns laboratories in the US and Canada had faced, including attempts to steal virus samples to send back to China, and said a security review should be done of CSIRO's lab, adding: "The cyber security of our high containment laboratories also needs to be reviewed." "In January this year, a Harvard professor and two Chinese scientists based in Boston were charged with assisting the Chinese government," she said. "One of the researchers was arrested at an airport on his way to China with 21 vials of biological samples in his bag." Ms Henderson said while there was no suggestion that any incident occurred at the laboratory in Geelong, this type of research also carried with it very high risks including the threat of a pandemic.

"In 2016, the US Government Accountability Office identified that -improved oversight of dangerous pathogens in high containment laboratories was required to mitigate risk," she said.

"In 2019, the Bulletin of Atomic Scientists identified that human error in high---bio containment laboratories was a likely pandemic threat. It makes clear that incidents causing potential exposures to pathogens occur frequently in high security laboratories - like the one in Wuhan." A CSIRO spokesman said it had no current research involving live bats. Senior Shadow Cabinet member Joel Fitzgibbon has backed the call for an investigation into the source of COVID-19."Everyone wants a proper independent arms length inquiry into where the coronavirus originated and how it came to be in our population," he told Sky News.
---
TIES between Australian researchers and the Chinese military need to be stopped in the interest of national security, says National Party Senator Matt Canavan.

He said recent reports within Australian and from around the world had raised serious concerns about co-operation with Chinese government-connected researchers An exclusive report in The Daily Telegraph recently outlined how China's People's Liberation Army has been involved in scientific research, co-funded by the Australian government, into the origins of the coronavirus which has been published in esteemed medical journals.

In an explosive revelation, a study co-funded by the Australian Research Council and the Chinese government, and trumpeted by The University of Sydney as helping to solve the puzzle of how COVID-19 transferred from animals to humans, relied on a key laboratory in an institute in the People's Liberation Army's Academy of Military Medical Sciences to conduct its "genetic sequencing" and "virus isolation".

The director of the microbiology institute, Professor Wu-Chan Cao has the rank of colonel and is a Wuhan Institute of Virology board member in a clear conflict of interest.

Mr Canavan told Sky News commentator Sharri Markson he believed co-operation between Chinese government researchers and Australian scientists should be stopped.

"Your reports along with several other we have seen over the past year have raised serious concerns about the use with which joint research which occurs between China and other western nations is being put to for potentially military, counter intelligence applications and in this case in terms of health as well," Mr Canavan said.

"I think the reports are serious enough that we should suspend research co-operation with Chinese government-connected researchers." Senator Canavan said while there would be exceptions "if it's more general and non-urgent research we need to know a lot more about these connections and what use that such intellectual property is put to."
---
The Wuhan coronavirus has hit us for six, and we need to know just where it came from - but we should also note the words of Tony Abbott, who raised the alarm in 2005

We can be proud of the fact that it was our Prime Minister who made the first call, anywhere in the world, to label the Chinese disease as a pandemic.

Now, sensibly, he is asking powerful world leaders, including China, to consider an independent committee headed by a world health expert to inquire into the origins of the outbreak.

In a perverted sense of logic, elements of the Chinese administration want an inquiry, down the track, by the World Health Organisation, the same outfit which, despite reports circulating as early as December about the virus, failed to investigate.

Indeed, the WHO, right up to mid-January, publicly endorsed Chinese insistence that there was no human-to-human transmission.

The former New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani, speaking on New York talkback radio last month, was not far off the mark when he said: "They sent over a million people around the world - 1.5 million - almost like ambassadors carrying the disease … what's wrong with them? They have no conscience. It's really a tragedy. This is directly caused by the Chinese Communist Government and by the choices they made …" I have spoken before about the American social scientist Steven Mosher. Admittedly, he has a bit of a cloudy academic past, but only because he has done extensive research work in China.

He is the founding member of an outfit called "A Committee on the Present Danger: China".

Mosher wrote a piece on February 22 referring to an emergency meeting held by Chairman Xi in which the Chairman reportedly said, among other things, that lab safety is "a national security issue".

Chairman Xi did not admit that the coronavirus had escaped from one of the country's bio-research labs.

But Mosher did write, re the virus escaping: "The very next day, evidence emerged suggesting this is exactly what happened as the Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology released a new directive titled Instructions on Strengthening Biosecurity Management in Microbiology Labs that handle Advanced Viruses like the Novel Coronavirus." There is only one microbiology lab in China that handles "advanced viruses", which is in Wuhan.

No one is suggesting that the viruses were made and let loose. On the contrary, Mosher argues that a senior researcher, Major General Chen, was dispatched to Wuhan, suggesting that the coronavirus may have escaped from the National Biosafety Laboratory which is part of the Wuhan Institute of Virology.

She was sent to put the genie back in the bottle, so to speak. Mosher argues that China first blamed the seafood market, not the wet market, not far from the Institute of Virology, even though the first documented cases of COVID-19 involved people who had never set foot in the seafood market.

Was this one of the many cover-ups?

Mosher argues that China pointed to snakes, bats and even a cute scaly little anteater called a pangolin as the source of the virus.

But, snakes don't carry corona-viruses and bats aren't sold at the seafood market.

The evidence he said, therefore, points to research being carried out at the Wuhan Institute of Virology and he further argues the virus may have been carried out of the lab by an infected worker or crossed over into human beings when they unknowingly dined on a lab animal.

The point is simple.

A world inquiry is urgent.

And it must be an inquiry conducted by an entity that does not offer China the power of veto.

THE WORLD NEEDS TO KNOW While sections of the Trump Administration are arguing that the naturally occurring virus came out of a laboratory, rather than a wet market, they are not arguing that this was deliberate, but rather accidental, consistent with what Mosher is arguing.

This makes Scott Morrison's call even more urgent.

Let us not forget that it was on February 13 that the Chinese Embassy in Canberra was expressing "deep regret and dissatisfaction" over Australian restrictions on travel from China.

You and I know we most probably should have imposed such restrictions much earlier.

But the Chinese Embassy was saying these were "extreme measures which were an over-reaction".

What is China likely to do while it perceives America and Europe, with people dying, as being dangerously incapacitated economically?

It is clear that the Chinese Communist Party is determined to emerge from COVID-19 in a stronger, strategic position than pre-coronavirus.

We can't afford China to grow strategically stronger simply because of the West's conspicuous economic weakness.

ABBOTT SAW IT COMING It would do no harm to dust off a speech made by Tony Abbott, as Health Minister, in May, 2005, in Ottawa, in which he argued: "It's impossible to say if and when and how a pandemic might develop, but it could be a worldwide biological version of the Indian Ocean tsunami." Tony Abbott drew attention, at an infectious diseases conference, to the fact "worldwide Spanish flu killed an estimated 40 million people compared to 15 million killed in the Great War".

He wrote: "In the United States … where it struck early, it's estimated the virus severely affected 25 per cent of the then population of 105 million with 650,000 deaths." I say this only because we tend to forget the brutality of such numbers. Wrote Tony Abbott at that time, 2005: "Manning Clark's History of Australia reports that in January, 1919, theatres, picture shows, pubs, race meetings and schools were closed until further notice and that people were advised to wear masks over their faces in public … 12,000 deaths in hospital made comparatively little impact alongside the 61,000 deaths in battle that the young nation had just suffered, even though 60 per cent of the flu victims were aged between 20 and 45." Prophetically he said: "Although the WHO would formally declare that any new pandemic had broken out, it may be prudent for Australia to commence border security measures beforehand." Well though we have done, many would argue we could have closed our borders much earlier.

Abbott said: "Once a decision to impose border security measures had been made, every incoming passenger would be required to make a health declaration; thermal scanners would operate at international airports to detect possible flu cases on entry and quarantine isolation areas would be established." Did this happen?

Abbott made the further point: "Not since World War II have Australians had to cope with very large numbers of premature deaths. Australians are unused to contemplating the possibility of death on a massive scale … it is hard to discuss potential dis-asters outside people's ordinary experience without generating the sort of lurid headlines which make some scoff and others panic." "It's important," he wrote, "not to overreact to potential threats. On the other hand … people and their governments need to take credible threats seriously and take reasonable and proportionate precautions against them. If a deadly flu pandemic ever seems imminent, no preparations will be enough." Abbott, in 2005, very much ahead of his time.

Surely, in any "National Cabinet", Tony Abbott's knowledge would be invaluable.

BATTY OVER BATS One final point which disturbs all Australians.

Why, when push turns to shove, do bats come first and human beings -second? These things are vermin, they are pests and they are dangerous. Here in Australia we now have 97 deaths, and the whole world is talking about wet markets and bats.

What do we do?

Well, farmers and landholders are prohibited from eradicating bats. Yet they excrete a virus, a deadly virus, more often than usual in stressful situations. We're talking about the Coronavirus.

What about the Hendra Virus?

It kills.

And Lyssavirus?

It kills.

Yet governments protect bats; but we don't protect people.

There is no treatment for bat Lyssavirus, which results in paralysis, delirium, convulsions and death.

Why are animal rights activists heard over the pleas of the public, parents and landowners?

Bats, here as in China, are killing people.

Doing nothing is not an option.Listen to the Alan Jones Breakfast Program on 2GB weekdays from 5.30am-9am
---
THE World Health Organisation has found it "impossible" to trace the origins of COVID-19 despite a 28-day investigation in Wuhan, dismissing suggestions it was leaked from a Chinese lab or came from a wet market.

The team handed down their findings at a press conference in Wuhan late yesterday, after a month of meetings and site visits in the Chinese city where the virus was first identified in December 2019.

WHO scientists, appearing alongside their Chinese counterparts, said the most likely possibility was that the virus had spilled over from an animal into humans or may have come from frozen food.

The findings appear to back Communist Party protestations that the virus may have originated from outside of its borders. Peter Ben Embarek, the head of the WHO mission, said: "The laboratory incident hypothesis is extremely unlikely to explain the introduction of the virus into the human population." Dr Embarek said the investigation had uncovered new information but had not dramatically changed the picture of the outbreak.

Liang Wannian, who heads the Chinese team of experts, ruled out the Huanan Seafood Market as an origin source, saying the virus could have been circulating in other regions of China several weeks before it was identified there.

"While some of the early cases had an association with the Huanan seafood market, others were associated with another market and some no market at all," Prof Liang said.

He said the team believed the virus originated in animals - likely bats or pangolins - but the intermediate hosts that allowed it to jump to humans were "yet to be identified".

He also said no bats in the wild in China had been found to be carrying viruses that may have mutated into COVID-19.

The virus could have been circulating in other regions before it was identified in Wuhan, he said. The WHO team agreed, with Dr Embarek adding: "The possible path from whatever original animal species, all the way through the Huanan market, could have taken a very long and convoluted path involving movement across borders, travels etc before arriving in the Huanan market."

KEY FINDINGS ■ Lab theory 'extremely unlikely' ■ Huanan Seafood Market unlikely to be original source of outbreak ■ Frozen food is being probed as a potential carrier of the virus ■ Study points to virus originating in bats - but it is unlikely they were in Wuhan
---
THE coronavirus that has become a worldwide pandemic may have been created in a "cell-culture experiment" in a laboratory, according to prominent scientists who have conducted groundbreaking research into the origins of the virus.

Flinders University -Professor Nikolai Petrovsky has completed a scientific study, currently undergoing peer review, in conjunction with Latrobe University in Victoria, which found COVID-19 was uniquely adapted for transmission to humans, far more than any other animal, including bats.

"It was like it was -designed to infect humans," he said.

Professor Petrovsky, from the College of Medicine and Public Health at Flinders University, who has spent the past 20 years developing vaccines against pandemic influenza, ebola and animal SARS, said this highly unusual finding left open the possibility that the virus leaked from a laboratory.

"The two possibilities which I think are both still open is that it was a chance transmission of a virus from an as yet unidentified animal to human. The other possibility is that it was an accidental release of the virus from a laboratory," he said. "Certainly we can't exclude the possibility that this came from a laboratory experiment rather than from an animal. They are both open possibilities." Prof Petrovsky, who is chairman and research director of Vaccine Pty Ltd, said COVID-19 had genetic elements similar to bat coronaviruses as well as other coronaviruses.

The way coronavirus enters human cells is by binding to a protein on the surface of lung cells called ACE2. The study showed the virus bound more tightly to human-ACE2 than to any of the other animals they tested.

"One of the possibilities is that an animal host was infected by two coronaviruses at the same time and COVID-19 is the progeny of that -interaction between the two viruses.

"The same process can happen in a petri-dish. If you have cells in culture and you have human cells in that culture which the viruses are infecting, then if there are two viruses in that dish, they can swap genetic information and you can accidentally or deliberately create a whole third new virus out of that system.

"In other words COVID-19 could have been created from that recombination event in an animal host or it could have occurred in a cell-culture experiment." Scientists worldwide have, to date, overwhelmingly said the virus more likely originated in a wet-market and was not created in a laboratory.

Asked why scientists have had this view, Professor Petrovsky said scientists "try not to be political" and do not want their research impacted adversely by tighter laboratory controls.

Prof Petrovsky was originally modelling the virus in January to prepare a vaccine candidate. He then turned his attention to "explore what animal species might have been -involved in the transmission to humans" to understand the origins of the virus - and had a "surprising" -result when none were well-adapted.

"We found that the COVID-19 virus was particularly well-adapted to bind to human cells and that was far superior to its ability to bind to the cells of any other animal species, which is quite unusual because typically when a virus is well-adapted to an animal and then it by chance crosses to a human, typically, you would expect it to have lower-binding to human cells than to the original host animal.

"We found the opposite so that was a big surprise," he said. The study, a collaboration between Flinders University and Latrobe University, titled "In Silico comparison of spike protein-ACE2 binding affinities across species; significance for the possible origin of SARS-CoV-2 virus", is awaiting peer-review.
---
Veterans still in the firing line THE Morrison Government's treatment of our war veterans is more than disgusting (The real 'brutal' truth - Alan Jones, 11/2). What a coward's way to sneakily change the Meritorious Unit Citation's status to suit one's own agenda, then to treat them all as criminals is beyond comprehension.

 I have voted Liberal most of my life, but no more will I vote for the LINOs (Liberals In Name Only).

Glenn O'Sullivan, Kanwal

Thank you Alan Jones (The real 'brutal' truth, 11/2), "if the government cares nothing for our veterans, why should the voter care for the government?" That's a perfect question, and not only concerning veterans.

 The government is far too happy to kowtow to the noisy, activist Left while throwing the innocent majority under the bus. Amazing how the top brass in the army escape scrutiny. Equally amazing is that I never saw any of the top brass in the banking inquiry held to account.

 One rule for the upper echelon and activists, another rule for the average voter who put you in office.

Robyn Moase, Ettalong

Clayton's call from WHO investigation We now know from the WHO investigation into the COVID-19 virus that they have found nothing (Coronavirus cover-up, 11/2).

 Apparently it doesn't come from Wuhan wet markets or from laboratory leaks but the scientific experts think that it could be from bats or from some frozen foods imported from other countries ... seriously!

 It's just another cover-up from a country that thrives on blaming everyone except themselves and a WHO that is as useless as it gets.

 This was a Clayton's investigation from the start.

Nev, Menai

Saving face The report by the World Health Organisation on the origins of COVID-19 does little for the credibility or reputation of the scientists involved or the institution itself (Coronavirus cover-up, 11/2).

 It is undeniable that this report was concluded in haste, shallow and vague enough to save face for the Chinese Government.

 This brings the question as to what extent have segments of the scientific community compromised their science and reputation?

 The general public is asked to "trust the science" and believe in the scientists - WHO's Clayton's Wuhan report does nothing to help us trust or believe.

Bruce Collison, Banks, ACT

Flights of fancy The WHO investigation into the Chinese Wuhan virus was unnecessary (Coronavirus cover-up, 11/2). All one has to be reminded of was the fact that the Chinese Government banned all domestic airline flights from Wuhan to any other city in China.

 But they allowed international flights to proceed as normal. Charles Gates, Hornsby

A work in progress Federal Labor leader Anthony Albanese's labour reforms are excellent and will cost business a large amount of money, but the long-term trend in our country has been towards more insecure casual work which undermines living standards, is disruptive to people and should be corrected (The gig is up for job proposal, 11/2).

 Business understandably seeks flexibility and efficiency, but CEOs have relatively secure and consistent jobs, as do politicians, public servants and professionals.  It's time exploitation of all types ended.

Rod Matthews, Fairfield, Vic

Age-old problem Given the current debate regarding the JobSeeker allowance, there is one issue that no-one talks about - the older JobSeeker.

 The bottom line is, if you are older (above 60), you have no chance of getting sustainable employment. No one wants you.  This hasn't improved with the Government incentives for employers to hire under 35s. You can't get a job and can't get the pension until you are 67.5 years old.

 The federal Government needs to introduce a JobSeeker supplement payment of around $300 per fortnight for the over 60s, who have paid tax all their lives, had little access to superannuation and are the ignored community.

Grant Errington, Ashfield

Elements of truth If Dan "the Man" Andrew believes he has the Gold Standard of controlling COVID, our Glad must have Platinum Plus (Virus hits Vic hubris on hotels, 10/2).

 I was prepared to give him the benefit of the doubt with his handling of the hard lockdown because of the numbers of deaths and I felt very sorry for our southern neighbours.

 But now I am questioning him when he spruiks the Gold Standard in controlling his State. He has one confirmed case, locks down his State for one day and then opens up so a tennis tournament can go ahead.  Players from around the world are allowed into his State but he will not up his numbers to Australians wanting to come home.

 Now his COVID numbers are rising. Yep Dan "the Man" Andrews you have the Gold Standard of stupidity, or is it just electioneering.

Barbara Thompson, Newington

Chapter and verse Gary Halloran (Letters, 11/2) made the assertion that the HSC is a mechanism for grading a student's ability in "understanding the texts studied throughout the course", specifically in the subject of English.  I contend that the English HSC exam is there to assess not only what the student understands from Year 11 and Year 12 texts but to display their understanding of the English language, which they should have been learning for some 13 years.

 If a student sits for a HSC Maths exam but has no idea about long division, fractions, or any of the basic arithmetic methodology, then higher level mathematics might prove to be beyond them.

 The HSC should be an affirmation of a holistic education which would set the student up for the future.

John Dobija, Seaham

Majority rules Great article (It's not just McGuire, 11/2) from Andrew Bolt exposing the hypocrisy of the woke Left. Jacqui Lambie asks the same question: "Why do we keep bending over for the minority?"  The answer is that our politicians and business leaders are weak and lack the conviction to take on the minority Left, so it was a pleasing surprise to see Greg Hunt call out ABC 'journalist' Michael Rowland for his obvious left-leaning political bias. A tip for politicians wanting to succeed: there are many more votes to be had by siding with the majority. Silence and sitting on the fence is just not good enough.

Mitchell Beston, Woy Woy

Masking the issue I travel on public transport every day and am amazed at the number of people not wearing masks or not wearing them correctly.

 Most schoolchildren over 12 don't wear masks on public transport. I have also noticed many staff in cafes and takeaways who are serving customers and not wearing masks.  When is the government going to come down hard on these people and start fining them? It would be interesting to know how many fines have been issued to people for not wearing masks.

Stephen Totham, Wentworthville

Briefly ...

The year of the Ox? Maybe for China it should be the year of the Oxymoron. David Lambert, Berry

* * * I have a solution to the graffiti problem. If someone is caught doing graffiti the punishment should be a tattoo of an opponent's tag on the forehead.

John Stuart, St Fillans

* * * Wot. Tork about the pot corling the kettal blak Tony Wilkinson (Briefly, 11/2). Its consentrayt not consentrait. Lurn the kwenes Inglisch.

Glenn Balcombe, Oatlands

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
THE COVID FILES SNUBBED MAGNATE DEFENDS CHINA STANCE

THE controversy over Andrew-- Forrest's China connections- escalated yesterday when a cancer funding ann-ouncement with the Health Minister was cancelled amid disturbing revelations about the Chinese genomic company which supplied- COVID-19 test kits to the billionaire's charity.

Mr Forrest and Health Minister Greg Hunt were due to visit Melbourne's Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, to announce a $67 million package for kids with cancer.

But the event was called off at late notice and a joint -statement released instead in which Mr Hunt praised the mining magnate's Minderoo Foundation.

Government MPs earlier blasted Mr Forrest for inviting China's Victorian Consul-General Long Zhou to speak unannounced at a press conference with Mr Hunt on Wednesday, at a time when -relations between the two countries are frayed over Australia's call for an independent coronavirus probe.

But Mr Forrest yesterday denied that he was acting against the interests of Australia by giving a voice to a Chinese Communist Party official, citing Mr Zhou's help securing personal protective equipment and 10 million testing kits for all Australians.

"I'm the most Australian person I know … I put Australia first," he said. "I run the -oranges out to the game for Australia, not China or America …," Mr Forrest said.

"China stepped up so I brought the Consul-General along when we broke the back of the PPE crisis in Perth."  To add to the controversy, Mr Forrest's Chinese partner in supplying the COVID-19 test kits is the Beijing Genomics Institute (BGI), whose president once boasted of a corporate culture verging on eugenics.

In a panel discussion in 2018, Wang Jian declared that BGI staff are forbidden to have children with birth defects.

"If they were born with defects, it would be a disgrace to all 7000 staff," Mr Wang said, according to an English translation by Shanghai United Media publication Sixth Tone.

Mr Wang declared that none of the 1400 babies born to company employees have defects.

Employees also are not -allowed to have heart bypass surgery but must rely on "gene tech and clean living to prevent cardiovascular disease". BGI also tracks the dining habits of employees and has disabled its elevators.

Mr Forrest and wife Nicola helped secure the Chinese-made test kits through their charitable Minderoo Foundation for use across Australia.

The kits give the nation's largest pathology providers Sonic Healthcare and Healius greater capacity to test for COVID-19 as part of a threefold increase in total daily testing capability.

The Minderoo Foundation also has secured 100,000 nasal swabs for use in COVID-19 testing, which will augment existing supplies.

Long-stemmed swabs already procured by the government in China are incompatible with the existing Australian pathology supply chain, according to Victorian manufacturing sources.

They are too long to fit into the Australian standard sterile tube and the snap point on the shaft is in the wrong place. Clinicians in Victoria are understood to be concerned that the shaft has to be forcibly snapped leaving a jagged edge that could pierce gloves.

"This has become dangerous for clinicians as they struggle to break the swab shaft elsewhere while attempting to ensure that the snapped shaft, potentially coated in COVID-19 rich mucous, does not pierce scarce PPE and risk infection of the -clinician or nurse," said the source.

It is not known what sized swab Mr Forrest has secured.

Meanwhile, Sydney Chinese consul-general Gu Xiaoji yesterday launched a new PR offensive to deflect blame over the origins of the virus.

"Wuhan laboratory has nothing to do with the origin of the novel coronavirus," the office tweeted.

A spokesman for the Sydney consulate also issued a statement on its website claiming it was "impossible" the virus could have escaped from a Chinese laboratory.

"The research facility is a biosafety level 4 laboratory that is able to deal with the world's deadliest pathogens," the spokesman claimed.

US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo yesterday praised Australia's call for an independent inquiry into the origins of the coronavirus.

It comes after China's ruling Communist Part angrily dismissed Canberra's calls. Mr Pompeo, who has piled pressure on China over the pandemic, waded into the dispute as he sarcastically said that Australia upset Beijing through its "temerity" to ask questions. "Who in the world wouldn't want an investigation of how this happened to the world?" Pompeo told -reporters in Washington.  "The solution to this crisis will come from freedom-loving people around the world."While we know this -started in Wuhan, China, we don't yet know from where it started and despite our best efforts to get experts on the ground, they continue to try to hide."
---
Brits upset Beijing with Uyghur report AUSTRALIA is not the only country being targeted by China's "wolf warrior diplomats", despite taking the lead on standing up to Beijing over issues including the coronavirus inquiry and human rights abuses against the Uyghur people.

The Australian Strategic Policy Institute has released a report titled "Trigger Warning", suggesting the Chinese Communist Party is running a "co-ordinated information campaign" to attack UK public broadcaster the BBC after it aired revelations of the systemic sexual assault of female prisoners in China's Uyghur internment camps.

"CCP diplomatic accounts, Chinese state media, pro-CCP influencers and patriotic trolls on Silicon Valley's social media networks are spreading messages and narratives that seek to undermine critical reporting by international media," the report said.

The report comes just days after revelations in a speech given in Canberra by senior Chinese diplomat Wang Xining complaining about the Australian media and threatening those who "choose to make enemies" with Beijing will be "cast aside by history".

Clive Hamilton, Charles Sturt University academic and author of Hidden Hand: Exposing How the Chinese Communist Party is Reshaping the World, said that the report further underlined the nature of the regime and its behaviour.

"China under Xi Jinping has taken bullying to the next level; any nation that stands up to Beijing now gets the treatment," he said.

"We are now in a fight for the future of democracy.

"If the West loses, we will end up doing Beijing's bidding on everything." The report also found strong connections between Chinese troll accounts on -social media that amplified COVID-19 origin conspiracy theories and those that attacked the British broadcaster.

According to the ASPI, of the 500 pro-China Twitter -accounts that had previously pushed the idea the coronavirus was actually invented in an American biowarfare lab, some 110 of them "shifted to criticise the BBC, repeating the same narratives pushed by Chinese diplomats and state media".

Nationals Senator Matt Canavan has lashed out at China.

"While the West is consumed by whether Dr Seuss is racist, China is cancelling anyone who dares criticise them," Mr Canavan said.

"The BBC's groundbreaking first hand accounts of the genocide that is occurring in Xinjiang reveals the moral bankruptcy of the Chinese Communist Party.

"The CCP's attempt to cancel the BBC should encourage all the more people to read the BBC's reports and push back against China's appalling treatment of the Uyghur people." The report warns that Western nations will need to be on guard against the CCP's "propaganda and disinformation apparatus". TIM BLAIR PAGE 13
---
IN a decisive move against Beijing sympathisers in his own ranks, Anthony Albanese has vowed any future government he leads will shun China's Belt and Road Initiative.

It comes as the health minister said revelations a prominent Australian scientist believes it was possible the coronavirus was created in a Wuhan lab is "precisely why" an independent inquiry into the virus' origins is needed.

Labor remains wracked with division on China, with Mr Albanese moving to distance himself from the controversial Belt and Road Initiative, while his agriculture spokesman Joel Fitzgibbon defended his claim the Morrison government was "demonising" Beijing.

However, the Opposition leader yesterday refused to criticise Victorian premier Daniel Andrews for last year signing a deal with Beijing.

"A government I led would not be signing up to the Belt and Road Initiative," he said.

The controversial initiative is Beijing's strategic vehicle for investment in dozens of countries around the world.

Mr Albanese said the federal government had no grounds to criticise Mr Andrews given their past selling the Port of Darwin.

Mr Fitzgibbon continued his assault on Scott Morrison.

"All I've been doing is standing up for the national interest and Australian jobs," Mr Fitzgibbon told Sky News.

"It was just unnecessary for our prime minister to run out ahead of everyone else … if you're going to have an inquiry anyway, and we were always going to do just that, why use such intemperate language against your largest trading partner?" Nationals senator Bridget McKenzie said Mr Fitzgibbon needed to clarify if he was on Australia's side.

"Joel needs to get on board Team Australia or is he backing other Labor entities such as Daniel Andrews by putting the Chinese interest above Australia's," she said.

It came as Mr Hunt revealed Australian officials are already working with the World Health Organisation to get an independent COVID-19 inquiry started, insisting it was up to "disease detectives" to determine the origin of the deadly virus. The Daily Telegraph yesterday revealed that prominent scientist, Flinders University's Professor Nikolai Petrovsky, believes it should be "considered a possibility" the virus escaped from the Wuhan Institute of Virology.
---
Fears for a nation being torn apart Reading both Andrew Bolt and Tim Blair's poignant articles on the civil unrest in America (1/6), I'm reminded of an observation my father once made that the USA had both the best and worst of everything.

How true that sentiment has proved in recent days. Whereas thousands of pairs of hands rightly applauded healthcare workers for their efforts in dealing with COVID-19, those restless hands are now destroying the livelihoods of shop owners and seeking to attack the very people - black and white - who are called upon in a time of emergency to preserve human life.

Why has this recent tragedy been perceived by the masses in various cities as granting a seal of approval to reduce the property of others to ruins?

Is the best way to respond to police incompetence really by razing local infrastructure, graffitiing public buildings, raiding convenience stores and stealing electronic goods?

I greatly fear America will further retreat into a toxic tribalism, where citizens are suspicious of each other and the worst is assumed about the men and women who serve in the often volatile vocation that is public law enforcement.

Peter Waterhouse, Craigieburn

" "" The violence and looting under the guise of protest is doing nothing to honour the memory of George Floyd.

If anything, it is reinforcing the stereotype of why police come down hard in some areas (although there is no excusing illegal police behaviour).

Mr Floyd's avoidable death was an absolute disgrace, but stealing from and destroying the businesses of innocent people, is abhorrent and has nothing to do with racism.

K Baker, Engadine

Lab security is an issue globally - not just China I was somewhat alarmed after reading Sharri Markson's virus origins story, where it was revealed that "accidents do occur" in the world of security of sensitive biological agents (Lab leaks happen: former spy chief, 1/6).

Nothing is proven, but it appears the Wuhan virus outbreak could be centred around the Wuhan Institute of Virology, but what is equally disturbing appears to be the fact that other "accidents" have happened at "level 4" facilities globally.

As stated, any review or probe of the Wuhan virus should encompass all such biosecurity laboratories, worldwide.

It's not good enough that lax containment measures and breaches of security protocols in these types of facilities, can and have endangered the world.

Peter Cattlin, Freshwater

Beijing's mangled message I love some of the phrases coming out of the Chinese Communist Party these days. Australians being chewing gum on a Chinese shoe was nicely graphic and the image of Australia as a kangaroo that is actually a species of American canine, while convoluted, was also beguiling.

However, currently running in first place for the Mangled-Message Cup, the state-run Global Times invented a fascinating take on US foreign policy describing it as so extreme as to be "nothing less than chronic suicide" (Pro-China supporters see red over US sanctions, 1/6).

Repetitively committing suicide would be an astounding feat in itself but it's the reassuring little "nothing less than" that takes the cake - like people promising you they are telling you the "literal truth".

Robert T. Walker, Wagga Wagga

Walking on eggshells There was really no need for a new report to show that our universities have only themselves to blame for putting all their "financial eggs" into the foreign student basket (Universities learning a harsh lesson of their own: report 1/6).

Even high school business studies students are taught about the risks of 'too many eggs in one basket' strategy.

Steve Ngeow, Chatswood

Wanted: intellectual rigour The Western world is reaping what we have sown by not fighting to stop emotions, ideologies and immature egos elbow aside facts, logic and good science.

No longer bastions of free speech, our universities suspend people like academic Peter Ridd and student protester Drew Pavlou for speaking out against unjust or unscientific activities.

Reasoned public debate is nigh on impossible on subjects like climate and energy as those opposing the orthodoxy are sneered at, de-platformed or simply ignored by much of the press and academia, irrespective of the quality of their arguments.

And now in the US, legitimate anger and disgust at some police brutality has been turned into an excuse for looting, arson, violence and abuse of political opponents, often under the umbrella of "protest".

The root cause of these and many other social ills is the lack of intellectual rigour in our schools, universities and society where facts and reason are too often subordinated to opinions, emotions and the blaming of others for personal inadequacies. In short, it's time for societies everywhere to grow up and face reality again.

Doug Hurst, Chapman, ACT

Leading by example Where are we, at a Dutch auction, or is it just political buy-off? Offering our frontline workers $1000-a-head as 'hush-money' is hardly the way to govern at a time when the government needs to show strength and determination (Pay of peace, 1/6). It's a time for tough leadership, not tap dancing and compromise.

Premier Gladys Berejiklian could have avoided this situation had she set the example by having her political colleagues and senior bureaucrats take a 10-20 per cent pay cut for 12 months - it's called leading by example.

With this behind her she could have more easily justified the deferral of the public sector wage increase.

John George, Terrigal

Time for Oz-buy law Recent events have led businesses and governments to question their over reliance on China, in the supply chain of required materials and stock.

Simply put, Australia needs to supply Australia. How?

Simple. Make governments buy Australian made goods (Treasurer tells bean counters buy Aussie, 30/5). Set a mandatory level of local procurement for all supplies. Tenders could be called for all goods. Set a target, for example a 50 per cent supply within five years.

Yes the products will cost more than cheaper imports but the money will circulate throughout the economy, providing jobs, taxes, profits, economic independence and national pride.

For instance, every piece of government furniture, for schools and office should be made in Australia of recycled plastics. This would be a beginning in using our abundance of plastic waste.

Let's start there and move on to all the myriad of government- bought product. Peter Franklin, Byron Bay Briefly … NRL supporters have been quick to blame referees over the years for their performances. Over the weekend the standard of refereeing with one referee was first class. Well done to everyone involved.

Glenn Copson, Eglinton

" "" Talk about pent up frustrations over lockdowns (Ignited States of America, 1/6). The bleeding obvious no one has mentioned - it is why they have gone nuts and now let's see how many get the virus with their group protests.

Sandra, Leichhardt " "" Rioting, violence, arson, looting are not protesting - these are criminal acts and should be treated as such (Ignited States of America, 1/6).

Peter Wilcox, Blayney " "" Ben Fordham is a brilliant replacement for Alan Jones. Loved his first up interview with PM Scott Morrison. Asked to comment on what was happening in America, the PM wisely said Martin Luther King would not have been into the rioting - that should satisfy left and right Geoff Hinds, Merrylands

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
Bat-tle for our sense of humour May I suggest that those who complained about the Boating Camping Fishing ad depicting someone eating a bat sandwich grow a funny bone and stop shoving your unfunny ideals down the throat of the majority of the population, who still have a sense of humour (Sanga scene driving 'em batty, 4/1).

Glenn O'Sullivan, Kanwal "" " Honestly, since when did Australians lose their sense of humour? Why are people complaining about the Boating Camping Fishing ads (Sanga scene driving 'em batty, 4/1)?

They are one of the most amusing ads around, and much better than those awful and repetitive ads for life insurance, funerals and instant finance.

Margaret Wright, Pendle Hill, "" " An advertisement for the Boating, Camping and Fishing stores is attracting complaints from people upset over an ad that shows someone eating a bat sandwich, which is a sly reference to COVID's supposed origins.

The Advertising Standards Bureau is taking the complaints seriously and has launched an investigation.

I am always up for a bit of larrikin humour, it's the Australian way, but after viewing the ad, it left a very bad taste in my mouth.

Peter Penglis, Kambah, ACT

Maintain pressure on China over their virus It's pleasing to read there is at least one influential person not letting up on China's responsibility for the coronavirus (American official revives lab theory; 4/1).

I was beginning to think world leaders had conveniently swept this matter under the politically correct carpet for fear of antagonising China.

In fact I'm still not sure if that's not the case, given the WHO investigation is looking more and more by the day to be a non-event/ whitewash.

There is no denying this catastrophic event originated in China. Whether it was man-made might be open to conjecture but there is no doubt China has to be held accountable, regardless of the precise circumstances. Why then are world leaders so quiet … scared, perhaps?

At least Prime Minister Scott Morrison has had the intestinal fortitude to insist on an investigation.

The problem is it will be a Clayton's model. This isn't good enough; we must not lay down on this.

John George, Terrigal

Our heroes saving Fiji A great story in The Daily Telegraph about the Australian government and the ADF helping out Fiji after it was battered by a cyclone that saw the place flattened (Australia delivers aid to neighbour in need, 4/1).

The ADF is helping with the rebuilding of schools, supplying water and replenishing food.

What a great country we are - always ready to step in when needed. Barry, Hallidays Point

Many unhappy returns Various state premiers are closing their borders in an effort to protect their citizens from COVID-19 (Border closures see Victorians locked out, 4/1).

Might I respectfully suggest that the commonwealth does the same and closes our international borders to protect Australians from this very contagious disease.

Most of the people returning to Australia now would probably have resided overseas for a number of years, and are using the dual passport system to gain entry to a relatively stable virus environment.

We have done the hard yards over 12 months now to try and combat this disease and to be placed in peril because of the returning "expats" doesn't sit well with a lot of people.

Janice Russell, Malua Bay

Voice of '60s crosses over A voice from one of Liverpool's (England) greatest has fallen, Gerry Marsden (Singer Gerry Marsden dies aged 78 - Online, 4/1).

Gerry's style of writing and singing was heartfelt, melodic but catchy, with a voice that was, somehow, never going to be anything other than true to its roots.

With his band the Pacemakers he helped make the '60s so memorable, and gave us songs that will be eternal, I am sure.

Never a boastful or a brash person just an all-round great guy. As a singer myself for all of those years, I was indeed privileged to have sung and recorded some of his songs with Don't Let The Sun Catch You Crying being a favourite.

Gerry Marsden, we salute you, and Liverpool will miss a true and loved son. Dave Burt, Kingswood

Keeping the arts in tune I am looking forward to attending my first opera production at the Sydney Opera House this month.

While many I know have seen performances by overseas artists and children's shows with grandchildren, now is the time we all should support our Australian performers in the arts.

Hard to believe that the early version of The Merry Widow was initially unsuccessful (Merry Widow's magic was inspired by a flop, History, 4/1).

La Traviata (outdoors) is my Christmas gift to myself and this time not in the "cheap" seats (COVID restrictions permitted).

Gloria Velleley, Belrose

Fuel for thought There is an old saying a picture paints a thousand words. Monday's picture of the gas-guzzling, carbon dioxide-producing Land Cruiser definitely gave Jane Caro the stranded feeling (Gas-guzzler lands climate crusader in muddy spot, 4/1).

Ms Caro, should remember the words, do as I say.

Her comments that they needed such a vehicle to get to her farm makes me think "pigs might fly".

A vehicle such as a Suzuki Jimny, a small, fuel-sipping four-wheel-drive could easily get there and probably not get stuck.

It's amazing noisy advocates for climate change don't practise what they preach. Joe Kovac, Prestons

Masking of retail issue Regardless of your opinion on the mandatory wearing of masks, it seemed very odd to me that the Premier suggested masks would lead to an increase in economic activity, when clearly this will not be the case ($200 mask fines, 3/1).

My local shopping centre on Monday morning was as quiet as a Sunday. Odder still is that I must wear a mask when quickly dashing in to get my morning coffee yet can stand around for hours with nearly 100 strangers in a pub or club, in a much more confined area, without a mask.

Restrictions must be logical and consistent if you want support from the community. I had previously thought NSW had the right balance. Now I'm a lot less sure.

Mitchell Beston, Woy Woy

Briefly … Thanks Tim Blair for your very funny piece in Monday's Tele (The year that will be - Opinion, 4/1). I haven't laughed so much for a long time. Please keep up your humour. We Coasties need all the laughter we can get at the moment.

Bob Fitzpatrick, Bateau Bay "" " Surely to goodness we should not have to put up with any waffle from Greta Thunberg this early in the year (Greenie celebs can globe trot: Greta, 4/7). This poor girl should be pitied for her ignorance.

Erwin Vitnell, Bathurst

"" " While smartphones give ready connections to photos, videos, online chat etc it is obvious that they are never smart or adequate enough to replace the real physical need to connect with family or friends (New rise of phone phobia, 4/1) Steve Ngeow, Chatswood "" " Way to go Mikey Wright, what a legend with that launch into the surf in Hawaii to rescue a stricken swimmer, truly epic (The Wright stuff, 2/1). Try that with a man-bun, hipsters. Only mullet power can claim that type of gnarly action.

Robert Brown, Davistown

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
DONALD Trump could reveal critical intelligence linking the COVID-19 pandemic to a secret lab in Wuhan in his final days as US president.

The Sun reports the outgoing president could play one final hand in the international investigation of the virus' origins, with Mr Trump reportedly looking to declassify evidence gathered by US operatives revealing the lab as the pandemic's origin point. It's believed Mr Trump may also release information from US intelligence operatives revealing alleged links between Wuhan scientists and the Chinese Army. A well placed diplomatic source told The Sun: "The US have stopped short of this so far but anything could happen in the coming days." A UK government source added there has been "increasing chatter" that Mr Trump and his top diplomat Mike Pompeo were planning a broadside against the Chinese Communist Party over their handling of the outbreak.
---
DEPUTY US National Security Advisor Matthew Pottinger has doubled down on the -theory that COVID-19 leaked from a Chinese government-run lab in Wuhan.

Pottinger, a staunch critic of Beijing, allegedly made the claim in a recent Zoom meeting with British officials.

"There is a growing body of evidence that the lab is likely the most credible source of the virus," Pottinger reportedly said, according to the UK Daily Mail.

Pottinger advanced the -theory as the European Union made a new investment deal with China last week despite protests from Pottinger and hesitance from the incoming Biden administration.

Pottinger was one of the first US officials to raise alarms about the origins of the virus back in January 2020. He -ordered intelligence agencies to search for evidence that it had leaked from a Chinese lab.

A Chinese virologist who said she did some of the earliest research on COVID-19 has publicly claimed COVID-19 was man-made, and that the Chinese government covered up its dangers. Western medical experts have discredited the theory.

The World Health Organisation has been investigating the source of the virus, but so far it is believed that Patient Zero has not been found.

Pottinger suggested in the recent call with British officials that the WHO probe is a ruse.

"MPs around the world have a moral role to play in exposing the WHO investigation as a Potemkin exercise," Pottinger told the parliamentarians, referring to fake villages created in Crimea in the 18th Century to convince the visiting Russian Empress the region was in good health.

"Even establishment figures in Beijing have openly dismissed the wet market story," Pottinger allegedly said, referring to another theory the virus was transmitted from animals to humans in a wildlife market in Wuhan where the first cluster of cases emerged.

Chinese government officials have rejected the US claims. NY POST
---
The facts about the communist regime in Beijing and the appalling way it allowed coronavirus to infect the whole world is apparent to all but the likes of Twiggy Forrest

How did Twiggy Forrest get to spin his craven kowtow to China into a public relations coup?

With the help of the Morrison government, that's who.

For starters, Forrest contributed to our dire shortage of surgical masks, and other vital personal protective equipment (PPE).

While China was hiding its COVID-19 crisis from the world, it was secretly hoovering up the world's supplies of PPE, leaving doctors and nurses dangerously exposed when the virus hit our shores.

We know two 90 tonne shipments of PPE, including millions of masks, were airfreighted to China from Perth and Sydney in February by Chinese state-owned property developers. And Forrest did the same.

Asked at a press conference in Melbourne last week about reports that his charitable organisation Minderoo had sent PPE to China, Forrest declared he was proud that in China's "darkest hour, without being asked … Minderoo proudly scoured what we could for thousands and hundreds of thousands of PPE." Yeah, to Australia's detriment.

The billionaire mining magnate owes his fortune to China, his biggest customer, so trying to dress up this act of self-interest as altruism is -nauseating.

Forrest's Chinese Communist Party partners tell him to jump and he asks how high.

Then he goes on Perth radio and pretends he doesn't know where the Wuhan virus came from: "I don't know if this virus started in China or somewhere else and frankly I don't care … because it just might be Australia, it just might be Britain, it just might be China." He can't be that stupid. This is Chinese Communist Party propaganda. Next, Forrest poses as a patriotic hero for bringing back medical supplies from China to make up for the ones he spirited out of the country.

Not that he paid for them himself. The Australian taxpayer is footing the entire bill.

Ten million COVID-19 test kits from China might have been a fair atonement (if they work), except that the federal government gave Forrest a platform to spout more repellent Chinese propaganda in return.

Days after the Chinese ambassador threatened a trade boycott in retaliation for Australia's call for an independent inquiry into the origins of the virus, Forrest spun Beijing's line alongside an obsequious federal health minister Greg Hunt. He even brought along a Chinese Communist Party official to speak at the press conference.

After the proverbial hit the fan, Hunt briefed out to journalists that he had been "ambushed" by Forrest and had no idea Chinese consul--general Long Zhou was to speak.

But anyone at that press conference saw Hunt singing the praises of the Beijing official. At one point you could hear him whisper to Forrest to remind him to "introduce" the honoured guest.

Then Zhou gave a speech claiming "the Chinese government has released information related to COVID-19 in an open transparent and responsible manner".

Hah! What a lie.

The Chinese government covered up the outbreak, punished whistleblower doctors, destroyed evidence at the Wuhan lab, and on January 14, knowing community transmission was occurring, coerced its puppets at the World Health Organisation to say the opposite.

On January 23, China imposed domestic travel bans in Hubei province but allowed international flights to spread the virus to the rest of the world.

"The virus is a demon and we cannot let that demon hide," said President Xi Jinping five days later, having ensured the virus would be exposed to the world.

So it is shameful that the representative of a government which has imposed such carnage on the world was accorded such a respectful hearing to spout the regime's lies.

Hunt actually thanked Zhou for "the very welcome and appreciated message … I thank you for the partnership we have struck between our two countries on this health cause today".

He went on to dodge questions from reporters about the virus origins. "That has not been determined". And, about Taiwan's efforts to join the WHO, against China's wishes. "Nice try" Hunt told the reporter.

Then Forrest urged Australia to postpone its call for the virus inquiry until after the US presidential election, which China hopes will be won by anyone but Donald Trump.

"If everyone wants an inquiry let's just push it back till after the US presidential election because if we don't this will become a whipping post", he told Sky News.

"I think that there's a bloke [Trump] camped up in the White House having a great time who'd really like to stay there. And I'd say, well, if you're so keen to stay there let's not make this a big issue, let's not make China a big issue, let's make how you manage COVID-19 a big issue and lets have a comprehensive inquiry when there's no political bias being pushed by America." Oh yeah? When might that be? When a more China-friendly president is in the White House?

Who does Forrest think he is, using a platform granted him by the Australian government to send Beijing's message to the White House?

If that's not bad enough, look at who he pals around with in China. His "very good" friend, who helped provide the test kits for Australia, and the man he described on Sky News as "a complete brother in arms", is Wang Jian, president of the Beijing Genomics Institute (BGI), whose corporate culture verges on eugenics.

Wang has forbidden BGI staff to have children with birth defects. "If they were born with defects, it would be a disgrace to all 7000 staff," Wang said in a panel discussion in 2018, translated by Shanghai United Media publication Sixth Tone.

None of the 1400 babies born to BGI employees have defects, he boasted. This is what to expect from a totalitarian regime.

Is this what Forrest wants us to keep turning a blind eye to? Australia has to extricate our economy from its China dependency. For starters, we need to bring back manufacturing of vital medical supplies, buy back the port of Darwin, and value add to our mineral resources to find new customers.

It will take national resolve to get there, but billionaires and compromised politicians will do whatever it takes to continue dealing with the devil.Miranda Devine is in New York for 18 months to cover current affairs for The Daily Telegraph
---
After lies, evasions, and threats it's up to China - not Canberra - to improve relations with us and the world

If the world stage were a schoolyard, China would be the oafish bully monstering smaller kids for their lunch money - and threatening payback if the teachers found out.

And if Australia's relationship with Beijing were taking place within the four walls of a suburban house rather than in the international arena, all our friends would be offering us a place to stay.

While it might horrify diplomats and exporters to hear this, the fact is we are rapidly approaching the point where Australia needs to acknowledge that China, at least as represented by the secretive, belligerent, and thin-skinned Chinese Communist Party, is not our friend.

Because while our relationship with the Chinese communist regime has always been, to use a Facebook term, complicated, the past three months have shown us just how fundamentally broken it is.

Even before Beijing undertook a comprehensive program to cover up the coronavirus and its origins - while still allowing international flights to spread it around the globe - our dealings with China were one-sided.

When last year the media raised the alarm of possible Chinese attempts to hack into Australian computer systems and MPs criticised China's aggression in the South China Sea, Beijing responded by putting the brakes on our coal clearing Chinese customs, using a variety of sort of plausible but really pretty spurious excuses to hold up the ships.

Although it was masked behind confused messages around needing to "test" coal more rigorously, no one watching was under the illusion that this was the behaviour of a bully: Let us do what we want, don't complain, or you'll get hurt.

This was just a prologue for Beijing's current modus operandi which consists of allowing a deadly pandemic to be unleashed upon the world, covering up its origins, gaslighting those who raise questions, and threatening economic harm - or worse - against those who press the point.

And to date, all efforts to find out exactly what happened in Wuhan have been met by threats, bluster, and distractions.

In response to a bipartisan effort to push Beijing to allow an independent inquiry into the virus, China's ambassador to Australia this week threatened us with a consumer boycott - the latest in a bizarre campaign to derail discussions of COVID-19's origins.

In March, Zhao Lijian, a spokesman for China's Ministry of Foreign Affairs, suggested that rather than a wet market or lab accident, the virus may have been spread by US Army athletes who were in Wuhan for an international military athletics -competition.

And just last week another foreign ministry spokesman, Geng Shuang, further tried to distract from China's culpability, saying, "AIDS was first discovered in the US in the 1980s and spread to the world, causing great agony for the world, has anyone held the US accountable?" Whatever you say, comrade.

Of course, had they been more transparent, thousands of lives could have been saved and the global economy might still be upright.

According to researchers at the University of Southampton in the UK, had Beijing been transparent about what was going on the spread of the coronavirus could have been reduced by 95 per cent now adds insult to injury.

Yet when doctors at two separate hospitals in Wuhan raised the alarm about a new virus jumping from human to human with the Chinese Centre for Disease Control in late December, their findings were squashed.

And, by the way, it's worth noting that it's not just with Australia that China is trying it on.

Recent months have seen Beijing raise the temperature in the disputed South China Sea, attempt to censor an EU report into the coronavirus, and seemingly co-opt the World Health Organisation.

All of which suggests that far from feeling strong and empowered, China - and particularly its leader, Xi Jinping - is feeling the pressure. Surely a truly confident nation with superpower aspirations would welcome the truth and the chance to make amends. In the meantime, in Australia, all of us from policy makers to citizens and consumers will have to ditch the globalist ethic that saw our manufacturing jobs shipped overseas for shiny baubles and service industry jobs.

Growth will have to be powered by reform and productivity and finding new industries in which to excel, rather than simply migration and selling raw materials for cheap consumer goods.

Our companies and corporate executives will, too, have to reorient themselves and remember they have obligations not just to shareholders, but Australians.

Everyone will need to be more sceptical about China - which includes our national broadcaster, the ABC, and anyone else who broadcasts Beijing's coronavirus numbers as fact.

Even local councils - I'm looking at you, Wagga Wagga - shouldn't let themselves be cowed or bullied into propagandistic "sister city" or other "friendship" arrangements. Likewise politicians like Victoria's Dan Andrews shouldn't be allowed to freelance negotiations with China's Belt and Road.

Importantly, none of this should reflect poorly on Australians of Chinese heritage, many of whom were among the very first to start self-isolating and practising social distancing in Australia.

Many of these Australians know too well, first-hand, the evil that occurs in the name of the Communist Party.Australians may have to endure some ongoing economic pain while this shift occurs, but the alternative - selling our independence slowly on the promise of foreign cash - would be far worse.
---
THERE'S SO MUCH INFORMATION FLOATING AROUND, CLAIMING TO BE THE LATEST FACTS ON CORONAVIRUS - AND MOST OF IT IS SIMPLY A LOAD OF GARBAGE. DAVID MEDDOWS LOOKS AT THE MOST COMMON MYTHS AND WHY THEY ARE SIMPLY NOT TRUE.

Myth: Sitting in the sun will cure coronavirus if you have it or prevent you from getting it.

Reality: The World Health Organisation (WHO) says exposure to the sun has no impact on coronavirus infection and countries with hot climates are reporting cases.

Myth: Holding your breath for 10 seconds without discomfort means you don't have coronavirus.

Reality: While shortness of breath and a dry, hoarse cough are symptoms of COVID-19, they aren't always present early. Authorities have debunked this myth and have even said it can be dangerous.

Myth: COVID-19 only affects older people / is only serious in those above 70 / only kills older people.

Reality: Babies as young as a few weeks old have tested positive, and in NSW the largest age group of confirmed cases is 20-29. Cases are also being reported every day of younger victims dying from the virus.

Myth: Coronavirus can be caught through drinking tap water.

Reality: There is no evidence to suggest that the virus can be transmitted through our water supply. All the major water corporations, including Sydney Water, have stated our drinking water is safe to use and there is no need to buy bottled water.

Myth: The virus started from someone eating bat soup.

Reality: It is too early for scientists to pinpoint exactly where COVID-19 originated. Researchers have found similarities to coronaviruses found in bats but also in pangolins. In either case, the virus is highly unlikely to jump directly to humans but instead more likely to have passed through an intermediary host such as civets or ferrets.

Myth: Spraying yourself with chlorine or alcohol will kill the coronavirus. Reality: Not only has the WHO shot this myth down, it has warned that it can be dangerous to areas such as your eyes, nose and mouth. It also suggested it wouldn't be too good for your clothes either.

Myth: COVID-19 is just like flu.

Reality: This new coronavirus and influenza do share many common symptoms - coughing, fever and joint pain are just a few - but scientists warn this virus is much more contagious than the flu and, while research is still ongoing, the belief is it has a much higher mortality rate than the flu.

Myth: Pets, especially cats and dogs, are spreading the virus to their owners. Reality: The WHO says there is no evidence that your pets can spread the disease.

Myth: The virus was created in a Chinese lab and is a form of genetic warfare aimed at making China the ruler of the world.

Reality: It is natural in origin. A team of researchers including Kristian Andersen, an associate professor of immunology and microbiology at Scripps Research, Robert Garry of Tulane University, Edward Holmes of the University of Sydney, Andrew Rambaut of University of Edinburgh and W. Ian Lipkin of Columbia University recently published those findings in the journal Nature Medicine.

Myth: Drinking water every 15 minutes will flush out the virus. Reality: An email that was doing the rounds in the early stages of this pandemic suggested drinking water regularly would flush the virus down your throat to be killed by your stomach acids. This has been debunked by leading health authorities, who point out there are often millions of virus particles being ingested and they can enter through your eyes and nose too.

Myth: Once you have coronavirus you have it for life.

Reality: Like other viruses, you fully recover from COVID-19. Some patients will become extremely ill and others will tragically die but the vast majority of people will make a full recovery.

Myth: Wearing a mask will prevent you from getting coronavirus. Reality: NSW Health does not recommend a face mask for the general population, saying they should be used by those who have the virus or are showing symptoms. There is mixed advice on this, with some countries such as South Korea, where the spread was slow and the death rate low, having most of its citizens wearing masks in public. Many experts agree that cheap or makeshift masks still have a high potential of letting the virus in.

Myth: Hand dryers can kill COVID-19.

Reality: There is no evidence that would suggest this is the case, with NSW Health saying hand dryers could potentially help spread the disease if someone who hasn't adequately washed their hands is using one.

Myth: Drinking alcohol protects you against the virus.

Reality: Unfortunately not.

Myth: Mosquitos can carry and transmit the coronavirus.

Reality: COVID-19 is respiratory virus that is transmitted primarily through droplets from the nose or mouth and the WHO says there has been no evidence to date that mosquitoes, who transmit disease such as malaria through blood, can pass on this virus.

Myth: The virus started from someone eating bat soup.Reality: It is too early for scientists to pinpoint exactly where COVID-19 originated. Researchers have found similarities to coronaviruses found in bats but also in pangolins. In either case, the virus is highly unlikely to jump directly to humans but instead more likely to have passed through an intermediary host such as civets or ferrets.
---
THE COVID FILES CORONAVIRUS cases across the world could have been cut by 95 per cent if China had come clean when it first learned the disease was infectious, according to damning new research.

As international fury builds at the Chinese Communist Party's handling of the pandemic and legal challenges mount against the regime, an investigation by The Daily Telegraph shows the true impact of the cover-up.

More than 1000 Australians have now joined a global class action suing China and the lawyer leading it said yesterday Beijing's whitewash will be central to the suit, which is seeking more than $A10 trillion.

"Had they acted immediately, it would have changed the entire spectrum of the world population being affected by this," said Jeremy Alters, head strategist at Berman Law Group. "It's at least 95 per cent, because had they closed the city when they first learned about the human to human transmission … it would have bought the world somewhere between six and eight extra weeks before it ever got here.

"Six to eight extra weeks in the lifetime in which we've been living for the last three or four months is an eternity." Research by Britain's University of Southampton, to be published in the science magazine Nature in coming days, shows the spread would have been dramatically reduced if containment measures were in place before Wuhan and three other cities shut down on January 23.

Had containment strategies been implemented at the start of January, when China first hid the fact that the virus was contagious, the researchers found the spread could have been reduced by 95 per cent.

Doctors at two hospitals in Wuhan separately reported to the Chinese CDC on December 27 and 29 that the then-unnamed virus was contagious, but it wasn't until January 20, after weeks of trying to suppress the information, that the Chinese government announced this finding.

If the measures "could have been conducted one week, two weeks, or three weeks earlier in China, cases could have been reduced by 66 per cent, 86 per cent, and 95 per cent, respectively, -together with significantly -reducing the number of affected areas", says the research, which accords with several other studies.

But lead researcher Professor Andy Tatem noted the study also showed that had China delayed its January 23 quarantine for another month the outbreak would have been "about 70 times bigger than actually happened".

With the global COVID-19 infection toll approaching three million yesterday there were increasing calls to hold China accountable.

US President Donald Trump and Prime Minister Scott Morrison are among leaders demanding a probe into the pandemic origins.

US intelligence officials are investigating whether the new coronavirus came from a high-security Wuhan lab or was naturally transmitted from bats to humans.

Although conspiracists argue the virus was man-made, most scientists concur that it was biological in nature.

But this doesn't preclude the possibility the virus was being tested at the lab and -accidentally escaped.

China has repeatedly blocked efforts to investigate the virus, from disinfecting the Wuhan seafood market characterised as the inception point before any swabs could be taken, to arresting whistleblowers who tried to warn the world about what was coming.

Beijing has also orchestrated a misinformation campaign that at times has accused the US military of introducing the virus.

According to a new report by the European Union's External Action Service, China and Russia have -"targeted conspiracy narratives" to shift the blame for the outbreak.

The EU yesterday denied it had bowed to Chinese pressure to water down the disinformation report.

It followed reports that said an early version of the report referred to China running "a global disinformation campaign to deflect blame for the outbreak of the pandemic and improve its international image".

A London-based Chinese diplomat this week said the world should "appreciate" the efforts of China rather than criticising its failings and called suggestions of an inquiry "politically motivated".

"We are fighting the virus at the moment, we are concentrating all our efforts on fighting against the virus," Chen Wen said. "Why talk about an investigation into this? This will divert not only attention, it will divert resources." Bondi local Daniel Rowntree (pictured above) is one of more than 5600 Australians who have recovered from coronavirus and, like many, wants answers as to how it started so it can't happen again. He supports calls for an -independent international review that considers how China's Communist Party leadership responded in the early days.

"I believe in a review process to see that the same mistakes are not repeated," Mr Rowntree said He believes the cases were so widespread in China the fact was that the "horse had already bolted" at the time COVID-19 was in the international spotlight. "By the time they realised it was a pandemic, it was too late."

Timeline of how China masked the impact of the coronavirus outbreak" NOV 17: "China's first case of COVID-19 reported, but not made public until March.

DEC 10:"Wei Guixian, a seafood merchant in Wuhan's Huanan wet-market, becomes sick.

DEC 20: A total of 60 cases of COVID-19 were recorded in China. DEC 27:" Wuhan doctor Zhang Jixian warns authorities of a new contagious disease affecting 180 patients.

DEC 26-30:" Multiple Chinese genomics companies are sent evidence of a new virus from the Wuhan patient data.

DEC 31:"Chinese officials alert the World Health Organisation's China office of an outbreak of pneumonia with an unknown cause in Wuhan. Internet authorities begin stripping posts from social media that include the terms "Wuhan unknown pneumonia," "SARS variation," "Wuhan seafood market".

JAN 1:"The health commission in China's Hubei province orders a genomics company to stop all testing and destroy samples of the new coronavirus.

Wuhan police bring in for questioning eight doctors who had warned about the new virus via social media in late December.

JAN 2:"The government-run Wuhan Institute of Virology identifies coronavirus and maps its genetic sequence but doesn't publicly announce the findings.

JAN 3:"The National Health Commission issues a gag order directing all virus samples be moved to designated state testing facilities or destroyed. Institutions are also ordered to not publish any research or information about the disease.

JAN 5: "Researchers in Shanghai map the coronavirus genome and hand the data to Beijing, urging that control measures be introduced.

JAN. 6:"China's CDC activates emergency response; not publicly announced. JAN 7:"President Xi Jinping takes charge of response; not publicly disclosed until February.

JAN 9: Chinese officials and the World Health Organisation announce a cluster of pneumonia cases in Wuhan.

JAN 10:"Chinese government expert Wang Guangfa describes the Wuhan pneumonia as "under control" and a "mild condition" on state television.

JAN 11:"Frustrated that their work to map the genome hasn't yet been released by the government, Shanghai researchers publicly release the sequence.

JAN 12:"Shanghai authorities close the lab for official "rectification". JAN 14:"The WHO announces for the first time there may be "limited" person-to-person transmission.

JAN 15:"Chinese CDC emergency centre Li Qun claims on state TV the risk of transmission is low.

JAN 18:"Tens of thousands of families in Wuhan turn out for a "potluck" banquet to celebrate Lunar New Year, encouraged by authorities to try to attempt to break a world record.

JAN 20:"As President Xi makes a first public statement about the outbreak, he avoids mentioning human-to-human transmission. It is left to government task force chief Zhong Nanshan to announce the same day that the virus is being spread person-to-person.JAN 23:"Chinese authorities finally lock down Wuhan, but not before allowing 5 million to flee the city without screening.
---
It's the rugby league quiz that will leave you wondering whether you even know the sport. Blame Aaron Wallace of Fox Sports Lab 1 Who scored the first try in the NRL?

2 With which club did Steve Walters play his last NRL match? 3 Who was the last player named "Bruce" to score a try in the NRL? 4 Who scored the last NRL try at the Sydney Football Stadium? 5 Who was the last player to score six tries in a premiership match? 6 Which two teams played in the last ever semi-finals "play off" match? 7 What was the name of the single released by North Sydney Bear Jason Martin in 1991?

8 Which team won the 1992 World Sevens in Sydney?

9 Who kicked the field goal for NSW in the Super League tri-series final? 10 Which player played in the final seasons for Hunter Mariners, Adelaide Rams and South Sydney (pre readmission)?

11 In what season did Robbie Kearns first play in a first-grade grand final? 12 What are the first names of the three Izzard brothers to play in the NSWRL? 13 Which Great Britain international played nine games for the Crushers in 1995? 14 Which player did Cameron Smith surpass as the leading point scorer in grand finals?

15 Who was the last State of Origin pointscorer at the SFS?

16 Who was the last player to debut as a 17-year-old?

17 Who is the last player to win SOO man-of-the-match awards in consecutive games?

18 Kyle Feldt scored the Cowboys' last try in the 2015 grand final, who scored their first?

19 Who captained Great Britain in their last win over Australia in Australia? 20 When is the last time the Broncos missed the finals in consecutive seasons? 21 Which player played more than 10 games in 2020 without losing one? 22 Who is the only player in the NRL era to score 200 points in their debut season?

23 Who were the first two NRL coaches to make grand finals with three different teams?

24 Who scored the first try after the COVID-19 shutdown?

25 Who was the last player suspended for 10 weeks or more for an on-field incident?

26 Who has received the longest suspension for a single on-field incident in the NRL era (clue, it's not John Hopoate)?

27 Who scored the first try at ANZ Stadium at its opening in 1999? 28 Who is the only Storm coach to have not won a premiership? 29 Which team holds the record for the biggest comeback win in premiership history?

30 Which team holds the record for the biggest win in the NRL era (1998-2020) 31 Which NSW player won all five SOO matches in which he played? 32 Which are the last three Sydney teams to win the minor premiership? 33 What nickname other than "Tigers" were Balmain known as in their formative years?

34 Who was the last team to win the premiership not captained by a forward? 35 Who is the last player to have scored three tries in a single grand final? 36 Who were the last two players sent off in the same match? 37 How many grand finals in the NRL era (1998-2020) have not featured the Storm or Roosters?

38 Which two players scored five tries in a match in 2020?

39 Who is the only player to have scored 20 or more tries in a premiership season four times?

40 Who is the only player in premiership history to have scored 10 or more tries in 10 straight seasons (he made his debut in 2004)?

41 Excluding 2020, which is the only team to have won a premiership in each of the past four decades?

42 What was the halftime score in the 2020 grand final?

43 Which team has the longest losing streak in the NRL era (1998-2020)? 44 Who is the highest scoring player to have never won a grand final? 45 Who is the highest scoring player to have never kicked a goal or field goal? 46 In what season did Manly last finish as minor premiers?

47 Which coach has lost the most premiership games?

48 Who is the last player to make their NRL debut as a 30-year-old? 49 Who is the only player to have scored a hat-trick of tries in a State of Origin match in NSW?

50 Who are the two players to have scored 18 points in an Origin match for Queensland?

THE ANSWERS 1 Darren Burns 2 Newcastle Knights 3 Bruce Mamando in 1998 4 Paul Momirovski 5 Jack Troy (Newtown 1950) 6 Wests 19 beat Canterbury 14 in 1991 7 Take Us To The Top 8 Wigan 9 Noel Goldthorpe 10 Tony Iro 11 He never played in one 12 Brad, Craig, Grant 13 St John Ellis 14 Eric Simms (41) 15 Jason Smith (field goal G3 1998) 16 Jason Taumalolo (17 years and 83 days in 2010) 17 Greg Bird (G3 2007 and G1 2008) 18 Justin O'Neill 19 Jamie Peacock (2006) 20 1988-89 (their first two seasons) 21 Spencer Leniu (won all 12 games with Panthers) 22 Adam Reynolds (208 in 2012) 23 Jack Gibson (St George, Easts, Parramatta) and Warren Ryan (Newtown, Bulldogs, Balmain) 24 Marata Niukore 25 James Graham (biting Billy Slater in the 2012 GF) 26 Danny Williams (18 weeks for punching Mark O'Neill) 27 Terry Hill 28 Mark Murray 29 North Queensland defeated Penrith 36-28 in 1998 after trailing by 26 points 30 Parramatta defeated Cronulla 74-4 in 2003 31 Brett Mullins 32 Panthers (2020), Roosters (2013-15, 2018), Bulldogs (2012) 33 Watersiders 34 Roosters 2013 (Anthony Minichiello) - Matt Scott was Cowboys co-captain in 2015 35 Michael Robertson for Manly in 2008 36 Adam Blair and Glenn Stewart in the "Battle of Brookvale" in 2011 37 6 (1998, 2001, 2005, 2011, 2014-15) 38 Matt Ikuvalu (Roosters) and Alex Johnston (Rabbitohs) 39 Nathan Blacklock (1998-2001) 40 Manu Vatuvei (2006-2015) 41 Manly 42 Storm 22-0 43 Newcastle lost 19 straight games in 2016-17 44 Jarrod Croker (2158 points) 45 Billy Slater (760 points, all from 190 tries) 46 1997 47 Tim Sheens (318) 48 Ryan Hall (31 and 171 days with the Roosters in 2019) 49 Ryan Girdler (Game 3 2000 at ANZ Stadium) 50 Lote Tuqiri (G2 2002) Johnathan Thurston (G3 2015)
---
A pandemic is out of control and wrecking lives and the economy because of a totalitarian regime's lies

The Chinese regime has through its ineptitude, dishonesty and recklessness unleashed a virus that will leave tens of thousands dead and likely cause a global recession.

China not only lied, destroyed evidence and allowed the virus to spread but it arrested whistleblower doctors who back in -December tried to warn the world about what was happening in Wuhan. At least one of the doctors arrested and accused of -"fabricating, disseminating and spreading rumours" has since died, reportedly from the disease.  Other domestic critics of China's response to the virus have 'vanished', including tycoon Ren Zhiqiang.

What worse is that the World Health Organisation opted to -uncritically believe the lies of Chinese authorities instead of properly investigating the outbreak.

As late as mid-January the WHO were disseminating dangerous Chinese propaganda posting: "Preliminary investigations conducted by the Chinese authorities have found no clear evidence of human-to-human transmission of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) identified in Wuhan, China." The WHO's complicity in this -catastrophe is extensive; at every turn they have praised China's response, pushed its preferred narratives while ignoring the regime's gross malfeasance. The initial Chinese cover-up included ordering the destruction of lab samples that established back in December the cause of unexplained viral infections in the Hubei province. How many lives would've been saved if China had listened to medical pro-fessionals instead of silencing them with threats?

A study by the University of Southampton suggests China could have prevented 95 per cent of coronavirus infections if it implemented tough measures three weeks earlier.

But the Chinese communist regime only took decisive action to contain the virus some four weeks after arresting doctors and other whistleblowers.

Meanwhile, the WHO refused to declare a pandemic until last week and as late as February it parroted China in criticising travel restrictions. When Donald Trump and Scott Morrison implemented travel bans against China in late January they did so against WHO advice.

Indeed WHO chief, Tedros Adha-nom Ghebreyesus, claimed that such travel bans would "unnecessarily -interfere with international travel and trade" and could "have the effect of -increasing fear and stigma, with little public health benefit". With a straight face he praised China's "transparency" while claiming the virus' spread was "minimal and slow".

We now know just how dead wrong he was with world renowned immunologists, including Dr Anthony Fauci, saying that the decision to close borders was crucial in slowing the spread of the disease.

How many other countries would've closed their borders and -restricted the outbreak if the WHO had encouraged bans instead of condemning them? How many would be spared loss and suffering if the WHO did its job instead of lecturing the world about not referring to the -Chinese origins of the disease?

If we want to stop the next pandemic it's important to hold China's feet to the fire and ensure they take meaningful measures to mitigate the risks of another global crisis. COVID-19 or Wuhan coronavirus is not the first pandemic to originate from a Chinese wet market. SARS and the Bird Flu also originated from wet markets where livestock, sea life and wild animals are kept and slaughtered in horrific conditions. The cruelty of wet markets, that sees exotic animals like pangolins and civets along with cats, dogs and wolf pups kept and killed in filthy conditions, is well -documented. But the markets and the wider wildlife meat trade are also incredibly dangerous in spreading -disease.

After the SARS epidemic of 2002 to 2004 China pledged to crackdown on illegal wildlife markets.

However, it wasn't long before -enforcement was relaxed; the country's Wildlife Protection Laws are considered a joke with massive loopholes and inconsistencies.

China's propaganda campaign hasn't been restricted to lying to the WHO and playing identity politics. The regime has systematically set about controlling the narrative and pushing back against any notion that it mishandled the crisis and is responsible for the unfolding mayhem across the globe.

At home China sent hundreds of propagandists, employed by the Chinese Communist Party's Central Propaganda Department, to Wuhan to "strengthen public opinion guidance". But the regime's efforts overseas are just as nefarious.

China spends billions on its foreign propaganda efforts. The disinformation warfare poses a threat to democracies and is crucial in advancing China's interests around the world.

The current message being pushed is that China's response to coronavirus was impeccable while the US is -responsible for the virus's spread.  China's deputy director of the Foreign Ministry Information Department, Lijian Zhao, even pushed the conspiracy theory that the Wuhan coronavirus actually originated in the US. That is why President Trump continues to refer to the virus's real origins despite the hysterical reaction from the media.

We expect paid Chinese propagandists to push the regime's narratives but what has been staggering is the -inordinate number of journalists in the West volunteering to be China's useful idiots, praising the country's -response and condemning any references to COVID-19's origins.

Much of the US media, who up until recently were referring to the Chinese or Wuhan coronavirus, now claim that Trump's use of the terms is racist.They are happy to carry water for a brutal regime that imprisons and -executes dissidents, locks up religious minorities and this week expelled American journalists if it damages Trump.
---
Brits upset Beijing with Uyghur report AUSTRALIA is not the only country being targeted by China's "wolf warrior diplomats", despite taking the lead on standing up to Beijing over issues including the coronavirus inquiry and human rights abuses against the Uyghur people.

The Australian Strategic Policy Institute has released a report titled "Trigger Warning", suggesting the Chinese Communist Party is running a "co-ordinated information campaign" to attack UK public broadcaster the BBC after it aired revelations of the systemic sexual assault of female prisoners in China's Uyghur internment camps.

"CCP diplomatic accounts, Chinese state media, pro-CCP influencers and patriotic trolls on Silicon Valley's social media networks are spreading messages and narratives that seek to undermine critical reporting by international media," the report said.

The report comes just days after revelations in a speech given in Canberra by senior Chinese diplomat Wang Xining complaining about the Australian media and threatening those who "choose to make enemies" with Beijing will be "cast aside by history".

Clive Hamilton, Charles Sturt University academic and author of Hidden Hand: Exposing How the Chinese Communist Party is Reshaping the World, said that the report further underlined the nature of the regime and its behaviour.

"China under Xi Jinping has taken bullying to the next level; any nation that stands up to Beijing now gets the treatment," he said.

"We are now in a fight for the future of democracy.

"If the West loses, we will end up doing Beijing's bidding on everything." The report also found strong connections between Chinese troll accounts on -social media that amplified COVID-19 origin conspiracy theories and those that attacked the British broadcaster.

According to the ASPI, of the 500 pro-China Twitter -accounts that had previously pushed the idea the coronavirus was actually invented in an American biowarfare lab, some 110 of them "shifted to criticise the BBC, repeating the same narratives pushed by Chinese diplomats and state media".

Nationals Senator Matt Canavan has lashed out at China."While the West is consumed by whether Dr Seuss is racist, China is cancelling anyone who dares criticise them," Mr Canavan said.

"The BBC's groundbreaking first hand accounts of the genocide that is occurring in Xinjiang reveals the moral bankruptcy of the Chinese Communist Party.

"The CCP's attempt to cancel the BBC should encourage all the more people to read the BBC's reports and push back against China's appalling treatment of the Uyghur people." The report warns that Western nations will need to be on guard against the CCP's "propaganda and disinformation apparatus".

TIM BLAIR PAGE 13 EDITORIAL PAGE 18
---
THE COVID FILES CORONAVIRUS cases across the world could have been cut by 95 per cent if China had come clean when it first learned the disease was infectious, according to damning new research.

As international fury builds at the Chinese Communist Party's handling of the pandemic and legal challenges mount against the regime, an investigation by The Daily Telegraph shows the true impact of the cover-up.

More than 1000 Australians have now joined a global class action suing China and the lawyer leading it said yesterday Beijing's whitewash will be central to the suit, which is seeking more than $A10 trillion.

"Had they acted immediately, it would have changed the entire spectrum of the world population being affected by this," said Jeremy Alters, head strategist at Berman Law Group. "It's at least 95 per cent, because had they closed the city when they first learned about the human to human transmission … it would have bought the world somewhere between six and eight extra weeks before it ever got here.

"Six to eight extra weeks in the lifetime in which we've been living for the last three or four months is an eternity." Research by Britain's University of Southampton, to be published in the science magazine Nature in coming days, shows the spread would have been dramatically reduced if containment measures were in place before Wuhan and three other cities shut down on January 23.

Had containment strategies been implemented at the start of January, when China first hid the fact that the virus was contagious, the researchers found the spread could have been reduced by 95 per cent.

Doctors at two hospitals in Wuhan separately reported to the Chinese CDC on December 27 and 29 that the then-unnamed virus was contagious, but it wasn't until January 20, after weeks of trying to suppress the information, that the Chinese government announced this finding.

If the measures "could have been conducted one week, two weeks, or three weeks earlier in China, cases could have been reduced by 66 per cent, 86 per cent, and 95 per cent, respectively, -together with significantly -reducing the number of affected areas", says the research, which accords with several other studies.

But lead researcher Professor Andy Tatem noted the study also showed that had China delayed its January 23 quarantine for another month the outbreak would have been "about 70 times bigger than actually happened".

With the global COVID-19 infection toll approaching three million yesterday there were increasing calls to hold China accountable.

US President Donald Trump and Prime Minister Scott Morrison are among leaders demanding a probe into the pandemic origins.

US intelligence officials are investigating whether the new coronavirus came from a high-security Wuhan lab or was naturally transmitted from bats to humans.

Although conspiracists argue the virus was man-made, most scientists concur that it was biological in nature.

But this doesn't preclude the possibility the virus was being tested at the lab and -accidentally escaped.

China has repeatedly blocked efforts to investigate the virus, from disinfecting the Wuhan seafood market characterised as the inception point before any swabs could be taken, to arresting whistleblowers who tried to warn the world about what was coming.

Beijing has also orchestrated a misinformation campaign that at times has accused the US military of introducing the virus.

According to a new report by the European Union's External Action Service, China and Russia have -"targeted conspiracy narratives" to shift the blame for the outbreak.

The EU yesterday denied it had bowed to Chinese pressure to water down the disinformation report.

It followed reports that said an early version of the report referred to China running "a global disinformation campaign to deflect blame for the outbreak of the pandemic and improve its international image".

China has repeatedly -rejected calls for an independent investigation into the virus, saying it is "politically motivated".

"We are fighting the virus at the moment, we are concentrating all our efforts on fighting against the virus," top UK-based Chinese diplomat Chen Wen said this week.

"Why talk about an investigation into this? This will divert not only attention, it will divert resources." Bondi local Daniel Rowntree (pictured above) is one of more than 5600 Australians who have recovered from coronavirus and, like many, wants answers as to how it started so it can't happen again. He supports calls for an -independent international review that considers how China's Communist Party leadership responded in the early days.

"I believe in a review process to see that the same mistakes are not repeated," Mr Rowntree said He believes the cases were so widespread in China the fact was that the "horse had already bolted" at the time COVID-19 was in the international spotlight. "By the time they realised it was a pandemic, it was too late."

Timeline of how China masked the impact of the coronavirus outbreak" NOV 17: "China's first case of COVID-19 reported, but not made public until March.

DEC 10:"Wei Guixian, a seafood merchant in Wuhan's Huanan wet-market, becomes sick.

DEC 20: A total of 60 cases of COVID-19 were recorded in China. DEC 27:" Wuhan doctor Zhang Jixian warns authorities of a new contagious disease affecting 180 patients.

DEC 26-30:" Multiple Chinese genomics companies are sent evidence of a new virus from the Wuhan patient data.

DEC 31:"Chinese officials alert the World Health Organisation's China office of an outbreak of pneumonia with an unknown cause in Wuhan. Internet authorities begin stripping posts from social media that include the terms "Wuhan unknown pneumonia," "SARS variation," "Wuhan seafood market".

JAN 1:"The health commission in China's Hubei province orders a genomics company to stop all testing and destroy samples of the new coronavirus.

Wuhan police bring in for questioning eight doctors who had warned about the new virus via social media in late December.

JAN 2:"The government-run Wuhan Institute of Virology identifies coronavirus and maps its genetic sequence but doesn't publicly announce the findings.

JAN 3:"The National Health Commission issues a gag order directing all virus samples be moved to designated state testing facilities or destroyed. Institutions are also ordered to not publish any research or information about the disease.

JAN 5: "Researchers in Shanghai map the coronavirus genome and hand the data to Beijing, urging that control measures be introduced.

JAN. 6:"China's CDC activates emergency response; not publicly announced. JAN 7:"President Xi Jinping takes charge of response; not publicly disclosed until February.

JAN 9: Chinese officials and the World Health Organisation announce a cluster of pneumonia cases in Wuhan.

JAN 10:"Chinese government expert Wang Guangfa describes the Wuhan pneumonia as "under control" and a "mild condition" on state television.

JAN 11:"Frustrated that their work to map the genome hasn't yet been released by the government, Shanghai researchers publicly release the sequence.

JAN 12:"Shanghai authorities close the lab for official "rectification". JAN 14:"The WHO announces for the first time there may be "limited" person-to-person transmission.

JAN 15:"Chinese CDC emergency centre Li Qun claims on state TV the risk of transmission is low.

JAN 18:"Tens of thousands of families in Wuhan turn out for a "potluck" banquet to celebrate Lunar New Year, encouraged by authorities to try to attempt to break a world record.

JAN 20:"As President Xi makes a first public statement about the outbreak, he avoids mentioning human-to-human transmission. It is left to government task force chief Zhong Nanshan to announce the same day that the virus is being spread person-to-person.JAN 23:"Chinese authorities finally lock down Wuhan, but not before allowing 5 million to flee the city without screening.
---
Twiggy Forrest and a host of other business leaders are trying to replace our much-loved kangaroo with some awful new corporate logo designed to sell us to China A panel of wealthy elites, -including Twiggy Forrest, Alan Joyce and Mike -Cannon-Brookes, secretly -decided to jettison the beloved kangaroo as Australia's national symbol and replace it with an abstract image of a wattle that looks like a yellow COVID-19 virus cell.

Talk about bad timing. To be fair, in December, when the "Nation Brand" advisory council presented its final design to the government, the virus had only quietly started to circulate in Australia. They weren't to know they were advocating that Australia rebrand as a killer virus.

The council, chaired by mining magnate Forrest, was authorised in 2018 by former PM Malcolm Turnbull with $10 million to create a new national identity to market to the rest of the world.

It seemed like a good idea at the time, since the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade felt Australia's branding had become fragmented, with "no unified representation of the country internationally", according to its 2017 White Paper, which cited New Zealand's "100% Pure" as a model.

But, as ever, the devil was in the detail.

Leaving the running to a self-serving mining billionaire whose fortune depends on the Chinese Communist Party was always going to be a problem, pre-pandemic.

Today, Forrest's project is a fiasco.

Whether it looks like a coronavirus cell, a yellow snowflake, a gold disco ball, or an ink splodge, there is nothing remotely Australian about the logo, let alone appealing.

Instead it appears designed as a blank canvas to appeal to a Chinese market. While the design was "market tested" to 16,000 people in seven countries, headed by China, and over 300 CEOs, only 53 Aussie consumers were consulted.

"The design could well be Austria," says NSW One Nation leader Mark Latham, "a $3 million waste of money creating confusion -internationally.

"In light of the Wuhan virus, it's now plain embarrassing as it looks like a representation of COVID-19.

"It's a complete fiasco that should be chucked in the bin." Rather than retaining the traditional kangaroo logo which appears in our coat of arms, the council chose a stylised spherical blob representing a wattle flower rendered in gold dots.

Unlike New Zealand's black fern or Canada's maple leaf, the wattle blob is amorphous and generic.

In fact, the council's report warns "the word 'Australia' should appear under the mark at all times to … avoid misinterpretation".

There would be no misinterpretation if we used our recognisable and unique kangaroo, because the rest of the world has known what it represents since a 1773 account of Captain Cook's first voyage to the Pacific.

"We love our kangaroo - it is currently the most internationally recognised shortcut to Australia," says the report, presented to the government in December.

But, perversely, the kangaroo's instant recognition factor was judged a negative because it would "simply reinforce what people already knew about us".

The other black mark against Skippy was that "dual-branding situations of multiple kangaroos sitting side-by-side will not work".

But who said every kangaroo has to be exactly the same?

The flying kangaroo does not give Qantas jets a monopoly on what has been a beloved national symbol for two centuries.

The council chose the wattle, -hoping, "while not immediately recognisable internationally, it will become so over time".

The Morrison government -accepted all the council's recommendations, including the new logo and changing the current national slogan, "Australia Unlimited" to "Only In Australia".

In a letter to the council created on June 16, Trade Minister Simon Birmingham wrote: "The Australian government has … accepted the -recommendations of the Advisory Council.

"The new Nation Brand predates the global pandemic (but) it will be a critical part of the recovery." However, yesterday, the Prime Minister was having it both ways. "Whether it's the green and gold kangaroo or some extra new way of standing out, the world is going to know what buying Australian means," he said in a statement.

Birmingham also walked back his enthusiasm for the blob yesterday afternoon, saying: "Kangaroos will continue to be a key part of Australia's marketing.

"The Nation Brand … will simply seek to bring some consistency in how different government agencies, industry bodies, states and territories present themselves." So much for a unifying symbol.

There are two toxic threads to this branding exercise.

First is the embedded Year Zero ideology.

The council chose the wattle as a "a blank canvas, to tell a new Australian story".

But why does Australia need a "new story"?

We're not a blank canvas for other cultures to impose their views. As radicals in the West try to erase history, this is a signal to our foes that we no longer value our history, culture and tradition.

The brand also is designed to impose a "framework" on "the way the country talks about itself".

Good luck with that.

The report tells us the aim is to "shift perceptions of our nation". Is there a problem we don't know about?

Australia has a good reputation overseas, enhanced by our response to the pandemic.

In America, Australians are widely admired, in my experience. The only people who wring their hands about Australia's international reputation are China panderers and self-flagellating leftists who constantly find fault with our national identity, history, flag and system of government and bemoan a lack of cultural sophistication in the masses.

Sure, Australia's reputation is on the nose at present in China, but that's because our government rightly has stood up to the CCP by -demanding an inquiry into the origins of COVID-19.

In return, China has threatened us, placed boycotts on our exports, left our ships idling off shore, sent its agents into Parliament House to spy on us, and is widely believed to be the state-based actor responsible for hacking critical infrastructure.

As Forrest knows well, symbolism is everything in China, and the -symbol he is serving up, rendered in gold, symbolises wealth, riches and nobility.

Even if it ends up as yellow, since metallic inks are expensive and clog up high-speed printers, that is the Chinese royal colour (incidentally the least popular colour in the West). Since when did the democratically elected government outsource our identity to a self-serving oligarch?

Secondly is the catchline 'Only In Australia', which the report calls a "storytelling platform".

The phrase has a derogatory connotation in its most common usage "Only in America" always said with the roll of the eye. This is an open invitation to trolling which the council seems not to have considered.

Let's shelve the wattle blob and save our kangaroo. Miranda Devine is in New York for 18 months to cover current affairs for The Daily Telegraph
---
UNFAIR DEAL BEIJING officials gave no warning before slapping an import ban on four Australian meat processors now stuck in limbo for months amid escalating tensions over China's handling of the pandemic.

The operators were blindsided to learn China had suspended their licences to export with immediate effect yesterday, due to technical labelling and certification issues dating back more than a year.

The sudden trade block came just weeks after a warning from the Chinese ambassador to Australia that exports including red meat, wine and education would be targeted if the Morrison government did not end its call for an independent inquiry into the origins of COVID-19.

Chinese newspaper the Global Times foreshadowed "economic repercussions" in an editorial published before the licence suspension that accused Australia of "joining in on the China blame game".

The nationalistic paper claimed relations between China and Australia were moving towards their "lowest point in decades".

The ban also followed China's announcement on Sunday it planned to introduce an 80 per cent tariff on Australian barley, which would cripple the industry.

The suspended meat processors, NSW Northern Co-operative Meat Company (NCMC), and three Queensland meatworks - Pastoral Company, Beef City and Dinmore - are working with the federal government to resolve issues so they can re-enter the Chinese market.

But NCMC chief executive Simon Stahl told The Daily Telegraph it could be two months before the company can resume exports to China, which accounts for 10 per cent of their business.

Based in Casino in northern NSW, the company employs 900 people and exports red meat to 26 nations.

Mr Stahl said he received a call from his Shanghai office late on Monday afternoon to say there were "murmurings in the market" about problems.

NCMC only learned of the suspension from the Australian Meat Industry Council. Mr Stahl said NCMC would work through the concerns via the Department of Agriculture, and "didn't want to read between the lines" as to whether politics was behind the ban.

"I will stay out of that," he said.

Mr Stahl said some of the product that would have gone to China can be sent to other countries.

Total NSW beef exports to China were worth $736 million last year. Trade Minister Simon Birmingham said it was "disappointing" China did not notify Australia before the suspension came into effect.

"The reason given for this suspension relates to instances dating back over more than a year of minor technical errors in relation to labelling or other technical requirements during this time," he said.

"My expectation is that the technical issues we will find have all been addressed."Export Council of Australia chair Dianne Tipping said "it's a big concern."
---
A massive deficit for the future Circumstances are a little more serious than the GFC but still, the spending of the Morrison government makes former Prime Minister Kevin Rudd's much criticised handouts look miserly. Indeed, some handouts have been so long- standing and generous that many recipients stood down from work prefer not to return, even though employers need workers to come back.

Workers and taxpayers who are obliged to pay back this debt in 10 years ahead might look differently on this so-called heroic spending.

Brian Whybrow, Wanniassa, ACT

The Treasurer will soon unveil Australia's largest budget deficit since World War II.

I find this funny. The Government can still control and reduce the size of deficit by not spending too much. For starters, just reduce the too generous JobKeeper payment.

Mokhles Sidden, Strathfield

Words of wisdom from former PM Great wisdom from Tony Abbott (Actually, all lives matter, 23/7): "If you don't understand the things that have shaped the culture in which you live, it's very hard to navigate properly." BLM protesters lay claim to superior moral virtue, but many weep false tears, perhaps offending their own moral sensibilities.  They pay little attention to past choices, have little knowledge of Australian history, and march for Western civilisation nihilism.

It's important to examine the past and present achievements of Aboriginal Australians.

They are well respected and have equality.

Ron Brown, Ballina

Leaners and lifters The article by Jessica McSweeney that relates to JobKeeper keeping tourist towns afloat, is an interesting one (Coronavirus NSW: Areas with the highest JobKeeper rates, 23/7).

On a trip last week, I was in both Byron Bay and Coffs Harbour. I had dinner at two relatively large venues in both towns and was amazed that virtually all of the wait staff were Europeans, not Australians Both managers told me, in no unspecific terms, that their usual staff were on $750 a week, $1500 a fortnight and did not want to work.

Both said they expect them to float back when JobSeeker finishes, and both said in so many words "no way José, they've let me down badly".

Such is the state of play in two of the largest NSW coastal towns and, no doubt, this plays out all over Australia. Best draw your own conclusions about JobSeeker creating a new class of leaners not lifters John Partridge, Manly

Flight of fancy End of an era (Boeing, Boeing, Gone: No more Sydney from a 747, 22/7). No mention of the 747 SP (special performance) variant which must have been struck from the inventory years ago.

I had many flights on the shortened "pocket rocket" and pilots fondly regarded it as a hot dog, or a "stubby puppy". Time travels fast.

It was over 60 years ago when Qantas phased in the new 707.

Mike Fogarty, Weston, AC

Viral outcome With regard to the planned Black Lives Matter protests next week, it is time every state government showed how fair dinkum they are in protecting all of us from the coronavirus.

There should be fines and jail terms for the organisers.

If they don't then there truly is one rule for some and another for the rest of us.

Peter Wilcox, Blayney

Not a viable option I question the financial benefits of proceeding with the Narrabri gas project (Gas project debate dominated by lots of hot air, 23/7).  Investing further in gas is a risky economic move when fossil fuel investments globally are not doing well; in the past fortnight, Origin Energy and Santos have both announced billion-dollar write-offs due to collapse in global gas prices.

Moreover, the Australian Energy Market Operator and CSIRO have already determined that solar and wind are the cheapest forms of new generation and when paired with storage solutions like pumped hydro are already price competitive with gas. Why opt for a solution that will endanger our aquifers, spoil productive agricultural land and is an emissions nightmare?

Gas simply costs too much for potentially so little gain. .

Jasper Lee, Ashfield

Cheap power for China Those planning our post-COVID-19 world must consider the Chinese coal boom that sees 250 gigawatts of additional coal-fired power plants either under construction or planned.

This will lift Chinese coal consumption to more than four times that of India where large increases are also planned.

Coal is still king in much of Asia, where governments obviously understand that CO2 plays a minor part at best in climate change and they can burn coal with impunity without threatening their future.

A cynic might conclude that having shut down industry in much of the world with a virus originating in their country, the Chinese now plan to gain the advantage with cheap power unacceptable to much of the gullible west. We should not let this happen here.

Doug Hurst, Chapman, ACT

Panda-monium I think the only person rubbing his hands with glee at the pandemic his country caused is Xi Jinping. The world is in economic decline, people are dying in the thousands, the US is in disarray and there are massive job losses. If you didn't know better, you would think this was some kind of master plan orchestrated by China to swallow up smaller countries indebted to the Communist rule.

The smiling Panda couldn't be that clever, could he?

Janice Russell, Malua Bay

Cooking with gas We read Mr Zinn's (Gas project debate dominated by lots of hot air, 23/7) with interest.

We've been gas stove users ourselves. For a long time, we resisted change because we loved cooking with gas for its instant heat.  We finally made the switch to an electric cooktop when we learnt about the respiratory (health) impacts and air pollution created from using gas.

The induction cooktop is much easier to keep clean and turns out to be just as responsive as gas. As we have solar panels and were able to disconnect the gas, the savings on our household bills has been immense.

To all those gas connected homes in NSW, we would encourage you to switch away from gas for the sake of your health, time and budget, if not for the environment.

Tom and Evelyn Hunt, Oak Flats

Briefly ...

What a fitting final tribute, to fly the kangaroo on radar by the last Qantas 747 en route to the US (That's a real roo route, 23/7). Just as well it wasn't that stupid wattle emblem; it would be unrecognisable, in every sense of the word.

David Goon Pan, Cronulla * * * The fight against the dire COVID-19 is all encompassing. Hence, the flip side to Victorian Premier Dan Andrews plays the blame game (Editorial 23/7) is the sound observation that 'any time you're busy fixing blame, you're wasting time and energy and not fixing the problem'.

Steve Ngeow, Chatswood * * * You can get it chanting, you can get it marching, you can get it taking a knee. As a matter of fact, BLM ... you're flirting with COVID-19.

Leo Arathoon, Salamander Bay * * * If you want to preserve the name of the landmark Captain Cook Hotel at Paddington (Take a Captain Cook at this lunacy, 23/7), just stay away until the Marxists retreat.

Patrick Hennessy, Penshurst * * * With regard to the letter (Pension not pain, 23/7), if D. Cooper is able to do everything he/she claims to do on the old age pension, then I think he/she should be running for the Treasurer's position at the next election.

Pam Duffy, Oatley

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
A TSUNAMI of red ink has engulfed the Australian stock exchange as panicked investors take flight, handing the market its worst single-day rout in more than a decade.

In the biggest sell-off for any session since the depths of the global financial crisis in 2008, the benchmark ASX 200 index plunged 7.3 per cent yesterday.

The slump has dramatically extended the sell-off triggered by the coronavirus outbreak and left the bourse within a whisker of a "bear market".

It comes as a succession of bleak developments buffet sentiment at home and abroad and heighten fears the global economy is sliding into recession as the virus marches rapidly around the world.

The selling spree yesterday wiped $137.1 billion off the value of Australia's biggest listed companies. It takes to $418"billion the amount ripped from the market since February 20, when the ASX 200 was at a record high.

The index has since tumbled 19.6 per cent - a fraction short of the 20 per cent sell-off broadly regarded as a bear market.

Rattling investors, Italian authorities moved overnight Sunday to put swathes of that nation's north under quarantine as they ratcheted up efforts to slow the spread of the COVID-19 virus. The lockdown affects 16"million people, or more than a quarter of the Italian population.

Separately, oil prices plunged at the weekend after talks among nations that are major producers - aimed at curtailing supply to prop up a market foundering amid global recession fears - broke down.

Heavyweight ratings agency Moody's Investors Service published a report yesterday saying global recession risks had increased as the spread of COVID-19 resulted in "simultaneous supply and demand shocks".

Also yesterday, Westpac chief economist Bill Evans said he believed Australia was sliding into recession. The economy, without stimulus from taxpayers, was likely to shrink 0.3 per cent both this quarter and next, he said.

Mr Evans noted the federal government was due in coming days to announce a "policy response" as it moved to stimulate the economy, and said Westpac would then revise its forecast. He cautioned there was significant "uncertainty around these forecasts due to the unpredictable course of the outbreak".

In a research report, a team of Moody's analysts said the virus would "hurt economic growth in many countries" in the first half this year.

"Global recession risks have risen. The longer the outbreak affects economic activity, the demand shock will dominate and lead to recessionary -dynamics," they said.

"In particular, a sustained pullback in consumption, coupled with extended closures of businesses, would hurt earnings, drive layoffs and weigh on sentiment." In such a climate, the recessionary dynamics could become "self sustaining", Moody's said.

The ASX 200 has lost ground in 10 of the past 12 trading sessions, surrendering about 1400 points.

Over that period, it has shed all the gains it made in the previous 13 months: at 5760.6 points, it is back where it last sat in early January last year.

The major banks, which have been punished in the sell-off, were again in the crosshairs yesterday.

Shares in the big four fell more than 6"per cent, dragging them all deep into bear-market territory.

Mining titan BHP was also among those hit particularly hard as investors turned on resources companies following the breakdown of talks among oil-producing nations.

BHP shares tumbled 14.4"per cent.

Australia's biggest pureplay oil and gas producer, Woodside Petroleum, cratered 18.4"per cent, while Origin Energy plunged 15.8 per cent.

Fund management heavyweight Fidelity International yesterday said a "worse-case scenario appears to be unfolding for oil markets".

"Expectations of a demand shock due to the global outbreak of the COVID-19 coronavirus collided over the weekend with an anticipated supply surge," the said.peter.taylor@news.com.au
---
Ships rescue mission the right move I expect that many Sydney-siders share my discomfort with the state's management of six passenger liners in our coastal waters (Plea to save our souls, 1/4).

Treated as lepers, they are being refused port access or passenger disembarkation.

Their captains don't wish to sail away from access to ICUs with multiple sick passengers.

A plan for their urgent repatriation with currently idle Qantas aircraft might be costly, but the prestige from international publicity would prove an excellent campaign for advertising Australian tourism in the future.

The goodwill generated with the world's cruise liners is an opportunity not to be missed.

We cannot turn our backs on so many helpless people.

Alan Sexton, North Parramatta

Post-COVID revival needs to be made in Australia Business columnist Terry McCrann rightly calls for a post COVID-19 exit strategy - a plan for the government and the RBA to "unwind all their stimulus" (Enough stimulus, now for exit strategy, 1/4).

But an exit strategy must go further. We need to pay down the resulting crippling debt and eliminate our reliance on China which has been exposed as high-risk and a folly that will saddle Australia with a generation of debilitating debt to repay.

The time is right for PM Scott Morrison to resurrect Australia's manufacturing capability and re-establish its self-reliance.

Cheap energy enabled China to be a global manufacturing powerhouse. Now, Australia must embrace its abundance of low cost/high quality energy - coal and uranium - and, for the foreseeable future, abandon the ideological absurdity of high-cost, unreliable renewable energy that has progressively driven up energy costs and forced manufacturing offshore.

Bob Partington, Wahroonga

Life's little pleasures When this contagion passes it might hopefully usher in a new era of appreciation of what we all took for granted - visits to and from family and friends, the value of extended reading, the pleasures of the garden and its wildlife, and so much more.

We might also look forward to governments not being able to win votes so easily by propping up the rich at the expense of the poor, denigrating minorities and belittling the indigent.

Ron Sinclair, Bathurst

Qantas is Virgin on selfish In opposing the federal bailout of Virgin Australia, Qantas is hardly acting like the "spirit of Australia" (Help one, help all: Qantas, 1/4).

Virgin Australia has said that it requires an emergency bailout for its survival. Qantas has it all wrong when it argues that Virgin should not receive extra help.

Right now, the issue is not which companies are better managed. The critical issue is sustaining the economy This is not a matter of Qantas vs Virgin - this is a matter of avoiding severe recession or depression.

Once large companies begin to fail, the failures spiral so that even more companies fail and more people become unemployed.

Right now, through massive infusions of cash to stabilise employment until the crisis is over, the federal government is doing what's right for the country.

As a future traveller, I won't quickly forget the selfish behaviour exhibited by Qantas.

Harry Melkonian, Vaucluse

Back words with action Our government is certainly making brave statements like "those found buying and shipping PPE and other essential equipment used to fight COVID-19 to other countries" face a five-year jail sentence (The mask avengers, 1/4).

Wow, what brave words to use considering a five-year sentence will likely never be used.

Maybe if it was made mandatory and if used for the first offender it may deter the second offender.

Until it is used, it is a meaningless statement.

Jim, Wollongong

Bitter truth unmasked Tons of medical equipment vital to Australia's battle during the global pandemic spirited back to China by companies associated with its government (The mask avengers, 1/4).

This should be a massive wake-up call to not only our government but all Australians as to our place in the Chinese government's pecking order.

The message is, the Chinese government will plunder our resources as their need arises - regardless of our needs.

However, any criticism of the Chinese superpower will be met by the usual suspects trying to stifle legitimate debate by using the tiresome one-word fallback for those without an original opinion - xenophobia.

I have great faith the Morrison government will take the necessary steps to protect Australia's national strategic resources and guarantee a strong and independent future for coming generations.

There is no need for "xenophobia" to enter this discussion as it's not the Chinese people that's the problem, it's their ruthless government.

Bruce Collison, Banks, ACT

Protect our property I was concerned to read that on the one hand you have the federal government putting limits on foreign investment during the current health crisis (Safeguard for Aussie assets at crisis time, 30/4), yet an article on real estate agents highlighted their keenness to market our homes overseas to compensate for a slowing of domestic sales and thus agents' sales commissions (China eyes our assets, 1/4).

I worry that some struggling Australians could be convinced to sell at any price and then live to regret such a decision?

I'm not allowed to own property in China for example. Why can they buy property here?

Dave Buckeridge, Dudley

Saving the Origin Here's my solution to save State of Origin - and our sanity. A team of 25 players are chosen for each state and these players and any staff, referees etc are tested before entering 14 days quarantine in Brisbane. Another test is conducted on the day of the game.

Game 1 is played on a Friday night in Brisbane. After the game they are flown on a charter plane to a quarantine centre where they are again tested for COVID-19.

Game 2 is played on the Wednesday night in Sydney with players and staff returning to quarantine where they continue training for Game 3 on Sunday.

While there would be no crowds at the games it would get huge TV ratings and keep the footy-loving public half sane.

Col, Blacksmiths

Briefly … With taxpayers struggling financially, where are the pollies and bureaucrats with their current untouchable wages? Surely a 50 per cent cut would be the first step.

Nev, Menai "" " As there are no new sporting clashes to show on TV is there any chance the free-to-air stations could play some classic games from the past?

Alan Wright, Grafton "" " Where have the climate change protesters gone? Also it's worth noting … no riots in Hong Kong, no protests in Paris, no terrorism anywhere. Just proves what a bunch of scaredy cats they all are.

Paul Blakeney, Glebe "" " I wonder if those whingeing returning travellers who have been "incarcerated" in five-star hotels would like some cheese and biscuits with their whine?

Allan Brooker, Belfield "" " Please stop these real estate agents from selling us out (China eyes our assets, 1/4).

Ron, Erina "" " Thanks to all the staff maintaining production and distribution of The Daily Telegraph. It is great to have my favourite newspaper still available every day and the Hibernation section has been a lovely bonus.

Jennifer, Westleigh

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily TelegraphGPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
IT'S TIME TO CLOSE THE BORDER If the Melbourne hotspot suburbs are supposed to be in lockdown, then how on Earth did people get out of their suburb and into Sydney ("Bordering on madness", 3/7)?

If they flew then is no one checking IDs at Melbourne airport? They must have security at the entrance and anyone from the suburbs in question must be refused entry to the airport and the police called.

Not only are they risking infecting innocent bystanders at the airport, but a plane full of passengers and staff who could then do another flight compromising hundreds more.  What part of this do Victorians not understand?

Alison Campbell, Ballina

Victorian Premier Daniel Andrews really needs to close the border to NSW. By not doing so he is endangering the lives of the NSW people when the Victorians come over here by either plane or train.

All travel should now be forbidden between these two states and lockdown to occur throughout Victoria.

NSW Premier Gladys Ms Berejiklian needs to close our borders, too, in order to keep the virus out of here and to protect us from what's happening in Victoria.

Please Premiers, see common sense and close the border until the seriousness of this virus calms down. If other states can close borders, so can you.

Diana McCarty, Emus Plains

Advice from China not really needed First it was China attempting to punish Australia with economic sanctions and increasing propaganda persuading students and tourists not to come here, and now Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian has told Australia we should refrain from purchasing unnecessary military equipment and upgrading our missile range ("Beijing orders Australia not to stockpile weapons", 3/7).

Of course Australia has to adjust its military capabilities and strategy in response to China's military build-up under Xi Jinping's rule.

China has increased the size of the navy and air force and established a strategic support force that focuses on space, cyber and electronics warfare.

China has primarily relied on its economic power to cultivate its neighbours, including Australia. However, these countries remain wary of China's authoritarian system, which is becoming aggressive and assertive.

After China slammed Foreign Minister Marise Payne for meddling in Hong Kong's internal affairs, Australia's response to China over the government's announcement of modernising our military capability is for China to "butt out".

Warren Cato, Manyana

Sovereign rights The arrogance of China's Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian to order Australia not to stockpile weapons and all countries should avoid an arms race ("Beijing orders Australia not to stockpile weapons", 3/7). Australia has every right to protect its sovereignty from hostile and aggressive nations threatening our security.

The wolf in sheep's clothing is lurking on borders across the Indo-Pacific, and perhaps they should practise what they preach.

Graeme Hodder, Callala Bay

Gender mender If the belief that chromosomes determine biological gender, as distinct from psychological gender, is "biological determinism" then I must be a biological determinist ("Kevin Donnelly - Reason lost in transition", 3/7).

This does not mean I am transphobic. I am just stating a fact. The transgender community makes up less than 1 per cent of society and yet we are all supposed to change everything for the sake of such a small minority.

Children are to be brainwashedin schools about gender fluidity before they have a chance to know what gender is.

Transgender women have the right to compete in women's sports with the advantage of a male physique and testosterone. If a biological sportswoman takes testosterone, she is a cheat.

I think it is about time that the 99 per cent stopped worrying about being labelled a transphobic, heteronormative, capitalist society and started worrying about the lunacy that is currently prevailing.

Being labelled transphobic if one dares to utter a different viewpoint from theirs is the same as being labelled racist if one comments on the troubles within other communities. Speaking sense doesn't a transphobe or racist make.

Jeanette Dixon, Casula

Taking a toll The NSW government certainly has toll mania ("Glad's slip takes a toll", 2/7). It is giving away $540 in rego tax for spending over $1300 a year in tolls, which might all be paid to a private company.

For an increasing number of people, tolls are by far their biggest transport expense. Worse, you can really only travel east-west on a train in Western Sydney without a gigantic detour.

Worse again, we are really only building motorways this century when most developed countries built them toll-free in the last century.

Government finances would be better off if the tolls were halved but never privatised.

Peter Egan, Artarmon

Tracking system Corona-tracking Woolworths send staff home and warn customers who have had contact there to be checked ("Balmain bug bungles", 3/7). Why wouldn't all shops utilise their loyalty cards for identifying those at risk?

It could also be used to make sure that the product limits are adhered to. Patrick, Pennant Hills

Plant a seed and ...

The new Australian Made logo, which looks less wattle and more dandelion, is insipid in appearance and symbolism.

Blowing on a dried dandelion flower will disperse its seeds. Never mind that they'll land somewhere and very likely sprout new plants; more important is the fact that the flower can disintegrate with one small puff.

Is that the image we want to present to the world?

Paula Houseman, Kensington

Briefly ...

The Chinese CCP need not worry about our new missiles carrying nuclear warheads because they will have something much worse - COVID-19 ("Meanwhile, in China", 3/7).

David Penn, Online

* * * I see China is telling our Foreign Minister to butt out of their affairs regarding Hong Kong and in the same breath telling us not to improve our defence. How about they butt out of our affairs? I'm glad we have a strong Prime Minister.

Judith Morton, Kariong

* * * Knowing the origin of the new ridiculous supposedly Aussie logo, I feel it would really only require the approval of the Chinese ("Our new logo just plain loco", 2/7). I just hope good money wasn't used to produce something that is not as good as what my four-year-old grandson brings home from kindy.

Barry Laurie, Tweed Heads

* * * An excellent article by Kevin Donnelly re transgenderism ("Reason lost in transition", 3/7). I was shocked to learn that the Safe Schools program is still being taught in schools, and even more so that the Coalition federal government is funding it. Abolish it now.

Paul Sobb, Cammeray

* * * Dairy farms in Australia are closing down at an alarming rate and unless we want to drink imported milk the government should intervene in this failed market and compel much higher farm-gate prices.

Rod Matthews, Fairfield, Vic

HAVE YOUR SAYMAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
ELECTRICITY COVID-19 adds to energy giant woes AUSTRALIA'S two biggest electricity operators have taken a hit from weaker power prices, with Origin Energy slashing annual profit guidance and rival AGL Energy taking a surprise $2.69bn writedown.

Origin downgraded its full-year guidance for the 2021 financial year, citing subdued energy demand due to the impacts of COVID-19 and a mild summer season and higher gas costs amid a jump in Asian LNG prices.

The energy company now expects its energy market full-year earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation to be in the range of $1bn to $1.14bn, compared with previous guidance of $1.15bn to $1.3bn, a downgrade of 8.6 per cent.

Electricity gross profit is now expected to fall $250 million to $290m year on year, compared with the previous expected fall of $170m to $220m.

The news sent Origin shares down by 6.9 per cent, or 34c, to close at $4.62. AGL shares fell 3.6 per cent, or 43c, to $11.42.

AGL will write down $2.69bn in post-tax charges in its half-year results on February 11, after a deterioration in long-term wholesale energy prices and "challenging macro-economic conditions".

While it did not change its earnings guidance like Origin, AGL took a giant write-off hit reflecting $1.9bn in onerous contracts relating to its legacy wind farm offtake agreements, a $1.1bn increase to its environmental restoration provision and $532m in impairments across its coal and gas power stations. It maintained underlying annual profit guidance of $500m to $580m after slashing its profit forecast just prior to Christmas.

It noted the impairment of the natural gas assets is linked to the rise in environmental restoration provisions.

Average electricity spot prices have halved from a year ago to between $40 to $45 a megawatt hour range in most states as a flood of cheap renewables lowered daytime prices along with cheaper gas and coal and softer demand amid COVID-19.

Power prices averaged $44/MWh across most states in the December quarter, 38 per cent less than the same quarter in 2019 and the lowest December quarter wholesale price since 2014 with only NSW bucking the trend.

Origin also upgraded its full-year forecast for its Australian Pacific LNG business in Queensland. It now expects production to be in the range of 685-705 petajoules, up 0.7 per cent from the previous guidance of 675-705 PJ.
---
SOCIAL distancing and masks weren't on th-e menu at one of Sydney's hippest markets as it reopened for the first time in months.

Despite Australian Medical Association warnings about young people and hospitality businesses' casual attitude to social distancing, observers say shoppers at Carriageworks Farmers Market in Redfern were way too close for comfort.

The market draws high-end fresh food and beverage producers from all over Greater Sydney, but, until yesterday, had been closed since late March.

"The stalls were still pretty close together and there were a lot of people hanging around; it's hardly the sort of get-in-and-out style shopping experience that you see at the supermarkets," one man, who did not want to be named, said.

"There were some stallholders without masks." A female masked shopper said: "I'd say about half the people are wearing masks and the social distancing seemed OK." On its website Carriageworks said it was limiting numbers to 350 people as well as banning both BYO coffee cups and tastings.

On Saturday the state recorded its lowest COVID-19 statistics in more than two weeks, with nine infections in the 24 hours to 8pm on Friday.

It's the first time NSW's cases have dipped below double figures since July 24, when seven cases were -recorded.

One of the new cases is a student of Tangara School for Girls in Cherrybrook in Sydney's northwest.

The school has been closed for cleaning and contact tracing is continuing, with the source of infection under investigation.

The origin of that and two other infections remain a mystery to NSW Health contact tracers.

Australian Medical Association NSW president Dr Danielle McMullen said the numbers were nothing to get excited about.

"I am more concerned now than I have been at any other time during this pandemic because we do have cases of community transmission and we don't know where all of them are coming from," she said.

"We also know that people are tired of lockdowns now and there are both businesses and individuals that are not necessarily taking it as seriously as they should.

"It is hard for businesses, but they really need to be doing it at the moment - particularly hospitality." Dr McMullen said many young people's disregard for social distancing was of particular concern and that "I don't know how we get the messages out to younger people if they are not engaging with traditional media".
---
Company director Charles Fairfax and his wife, Kate have bought their COVID-19 retreat, Balquhain at Blackheath. The historic Blue Mountains home was the little used weekender of the fund manager Alwyn Heong and his partner Ian Newtown.

While not one of the treasured colonial homes of the media family, Balquhain was briefly owned by Charles's uncle John B. Fairfax for a decade from 1980, and the venue of many family tennis parties.

Michael Pallier at -Sotheby's International, along with local agent Brenden Purcell, are understood to have -secured higher than its initial $3.8 million hopes, after just a week on the market. The Dover Heights based Fairfax (inset) spotted the advertisement in the Wentworth Courier. Balquhain last sold for $2.3 million in 2011, after three years on the market.

The heritage-listed 1890s home was built by the grazier, Malcolm Campbell as a holiday home from his base, St Helliers near Muswellbrook.  It was then owned by the Leslie family whose origins were back in Scotland, where they owned the tower of Balquhain near Aberdeen. They bequeathed the home to be used as a rest centre for Presbyterian ministers, with the church selling for $76,000 in 1980 to the Fairfax family who onsold it in 1990 for $675,000. Heong resides at Headingley House, the Georgian Woollahra home bought for $13 million in 2013 from John Spender QC then making the move from the Rose Bay trophy home Indah which Pallier secured a $27.08 million in 2015.

With retreats away from the city attracting increased attention due to the pan-demic, strong interest is also expected for Sentry Rock, the Hawkesbury River ranch style retreat listed by Louise Cordina, who runs Cordina Farms, and her horseman husband Glenn North.

It was built at Spencer by the late stockbroker Rene Rivkin in a rustic style and then expanded by Bob and Wendy Lapointe who paid $1.9 million in 2005. Cordina and North paid $4.5 million in 2017 for the 4ha retreat that has $10 million plus hopes through Trent Iverson of Harris Iverson Real Estate. Rivkin would either fly or boat to the riverfront some 60km northwest of Sydney.
---
Energy & water key to bush prosperity Warren Mundine's commentary regarding The Daily Telegraph's 2020 Bush Summit is a vision that many, many Australians have (Not just a coastal nation, 28/8).

We have for too long listened to the green left and those bureaucrats with similar ideologies, who have stagnated our country.

Water management, energy production, regional growth and land management are key to our development as our population increases.

Hopefully, the Prime Minister and the LNP Coalition are listening and reading because Mr Mundine has summed it up in four columns of print.

Peter Cattlin, Freshwater.

"" " Warren Mundine's great recommendations shows his knowledge and understanding of the bush.

He is spot on - Australia needs action planning and vision to bring energy, water, and support to regional areas, so the bush and all the nation can thrive.

Sure there were some mistakes made in our reaction to COVID-19 virus, but we will learn from these. To hasten economic and social recovery, it would be great if politicians put personality clashes aside, as well as unnecessary red tape, ideology, and power tug of wars, and worked together in the national interest.

Twenty five million Australians are asking for strength in leadership, insight and new ideas. Mr Mundine is correct - open up the bush with water and energy innovations.

R. Brown, Ballina

United vision can beat the ideological divide I applaud The Daily Telegraph Bush Summit and couldn't agree more with Anna Caldwell (Fighting for the bush, 28/8).

It is indeed impressive that an alliance of farming, agricultural and conservation groups "seems to put any divisive green versus brown politics to one side and comes together for practical outcomes that support farmers, bush residents and the environment".

We all need to look after the world we live in and not let ideology get in the way. More of it.

Tom Hunt, The Oaks

Help for heroes a priority Giving veterans a dedicated advocate to tackle high suicide rates is surely an idea whose time has come, if not even overdue, given the 500 veterans' suicides since 2001 (Dedicated power to probe vet suicides, 28/8).

Fingers crossed, the creation of a National Commissioner for Defence and Veteran Suicide Prevention, following The Daily Telegraph's Save Our Heroes campaign, will provide families affected by a defence member or veteran suicide with the necessary independent and professional support.

Steve Ngeow, Chatswood

WHOse side are they on?

Anyone would have to be naive to think that the World Health Organisation would investigate the coronavirus pandemic situation thoroughly (Wuhan gets free pass, 28/8).

US President Donald Trump woke up to these clowns very early, and so should our Prime Minister and our politicians now.

I'm of the opinion WHO are an organisation sympathetic to China and one we can't afford and don't need.

Erwin Vitnell, Bathurst "" " The World Health Organisation team that went to China to check out the origin of COVID-19 spent three weeks in Beijing. Not once did they visit Wuhan, understood to be where the virus started (Wuhan gets free pass, 28/8).

This can only lend weight to the view that the WHO marches to the beat of China's drum.

Alan Heatley, Elanora Heights

Coaches are the scapegoats This really is so very unfair you know. These poor coaches of NRL teams getting sacked for their teams' lack of performance and position on the league ladder (Seibold denies player revolt, 27/8).

It's the players that are on the field and playing so badly - why not sack them and start the team anew?

It's not as if the coaches grabbed the ball and ran up and down the field and failed to gain any points.

They gave the team the instructions and advice at the start of the game, but it's the players that just ignored it and carried on losing.

My sympathies go out to the poor coaches who are sacked needlessly for their teams' poor performance on the field.

Diana McCarty, Emu Plains

Island isolation needed It is time to face up to the fact that we either close the international border or properly enforce quarantine (Sleazy security and army refusal in quarantine inquiry, 28/8).

It is obvious the term "security guard" has been completely overstated because they appear unqualified for the role and city hotels are unsuited for a pandemic quarantine.

Christmas Island is the place for returning travellers where we can be assured they are COVID free after quarantine and are able to return to the community without fear of spreading infection.

Otherwise we will be continually chasing our tail with constant and random outbreaks.

Gary Bryant, Gladesville

Multi-tasking lesson for Dan Victorian Premier Dan Andrews has stated: "If the PM has time to be doing those things, that's fine for him, I don't." Perhaps a theatrical understanding of multi-tasking would better equip him to competently manage his state.

Our PM Scott Morrison does many things collectively and well. Mr Andrews seems to be having a problem doing the one thing he is obviously focused on, not so well.

R.M. Max, Shoal Bay

Beware the underdog As this has been the week of the Republican Convention in America, perhaps it is opportune to briefly assess US President Donald Trump (Battle lines drawn, 28/8).

He is blamed for many things but, love him or hate him, prior to COVID-19, America was in reasonable shape. Unemployment was down, jobs were on the increase with the share market and business confidence on the rise.

It appears that one of his party's catchcries will be law and order which could be a winner for him particularly with the current prevalence of violent demonstrations.

While the election is still some time away, the betting agencies certainly have him as the underdog.

Is it possible, however, that another minor miracle may occur and he out-Trumps them all. Again Darryl Tutton, Wollstonecraft

Drug slur a diversion tactic Donald Trump continues to debase American political discourse by suggesting Democrat challenger Joe Biden may have taken performance enhancing drugs (Battle lines drawn, 28/08).

And credit to your reporter to point out that he offered no evidence. This is how political journalism should be conducted.

For months Trump has been convincing himself Biden is senile and incoherent. Now that the Democrat challenger had a successful convention, he must be taking drugs.

In Trump's mind, only he gets to be the winner, and everyone else must be cheating. Like most of Trump's outrageous suggestions, it is a projection of his own anxiety and a diversion tactic.

Han Yang, North Turramurra

Briefly ...

It's an ill wind that doesn't blow some good. And so it is with the coronavirus. Schoolies Week on the Gold Coast has been cancelled on health grounds - how good is that. This excuse for teen drunkenness, drug taking and loutish behaviour is something we can all do without.

John George, Terrigal

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
MARKETS THE Australian sharemarket dipped despite a strong positive lead from Wall Street, weighed down by travel stocks after Brisbane -announced a snap three-day lockdown.

The ASX200 closed 0.36"per cent lower at 6799.5 points while the All Ordinaries Index declined 0.38 per cent to 7036.4.

OpenMarkets Group chief executive Ivan Tchourilov said the lockdown due to a spike in COVID-19 community transmission was a heavy blow for the already hard-hit tourism industry, especially just before the Easter long weekend.

Flight Centre shares fell 3.03 per cent to $17.95, Webjet gave up 2.8 per cent to $5.57 and Corporate Travel Management backtracked 1.56 per cent to $19.58.

In the airline sector, Regional Express declined 3.16"per cent to $1.53, and Qantas retreated 0.78 per cent to $5.07.

The Australian market had been expected to rally after the three main indices rallied on Wall Street on Friday.

The oil price lost ground after the massive ship blocking the Suez Canal was freed by a salvage team.

ThinkMarkets Australia analyst Carl Capolingua said the oil price pulled back to below $US60 per barrel again.

Origin Energy shares slipped 0.85 per cent to $4.69 and Oil Search softened 0.71"per cent to $4.19 but Santos added 0.7 per cent to $7.21.

Miners performed strongly amid higher commodities prices, with Mineral Resources advancing 2.54 per cent to $37.94, Fortescue Metals up 2.13 per cent to $20.58, BHP gaining 1.75 per cent to $45.86 and Rio Tinto up 1.75 per cent to $112.26.

Shares in poultry producer Inghams Group shed 4.72 per cent to $3.43 after announcing CEO Jim Leighton had left the company and was returning to the US for personal reasons. He's being replaced by non-executive director Andrew Reeves.

In the banking sector, ANZ slid 0.64 per cent to $27.99, Commonwealth Bank retreated 0.5 per cent to $85.57, National Australia Bank eased 0.15 per cent to $26.13 and Westpac was flat at $24.34.

Westpac CEO Peter King said a strong labour market and better than expected economic growth will likely shield the economy from any major disruption caused by the end of JobKeeper.

While Westpac economists estimate that up to 140,000 employees could lose their jobs as payments from the $90bn scheme end, Mr King expects many will find alternative employment in a surging jobs market. "From the economy's perspective there's actually a lot of underlying momentum in the economy," he said. "If you look at employment we're now back at 13 million people employed, which was the same number pre-COVID."
---
China threatens Oz wine exporters as Wuhan parties on

CHINA has hit Australian winemakers with a "deeply troubling" anti-dumping investigation threatening $1bn in wine exports while the post-coronavirus party rages on at ground zero in Wuhan.

Battered by drought, bushfires and now COVID-19, NSW winemakers were yesterday in shock after Beijing accused them of flooding the Chinese market, a claim the federal Government has vowed to fight.

And salt was rubbed in wounds for local businesses struggling to survive coronavirus restrictions yesterday when pictures emerged of thousands of Chinese people enjoying a pool party and performers in the very city that gave the world the pandemic.

China's Commerce Ministry announced a one-year -investigation to assess if Australian exporters are dumping bottled wine into the Chinese market, and may explore claims of unfair government subsidies. It follows Chinese tariffs on Australian barley and bans on beef shipments from several producers.

Trade Minister Simon Birmingham said the accusations were "deeply troubling and quite perplexing".

"Australian wine is by no means subsidised, it is by no means sold at or below anything other than market rates in the world market," he said.

"Our government will stand with the Australian wine industry to uphold their integrity and hard-earned reputation for producing wines in high demand throughout the world." About 37 per cent of all wine exported from Australia ends up in China, generating more than $1.07bn a year.

Richard Harkham of Hark-ham Wines exports boutique wines to Hong Kong and said he hoped China did not -impose tariffs on Australian product.

"It's very sad and all a very political tit-for-tat which I think is unfair. I hope this is just a threat. The wine industry has had a tough time," Mr Harkham said.

"About 95 per cent of my grapes were damaged this year because of the smoke haze from the fires. We've had no tourism because of the bushfires and then corona-virus happened." Mr Harkham said he had no plans to export to the mainland Chinese market in the future due to the volatile business landscape.

Hunter Valley winemaker Bruce Tyrrell, of Tyrrell's Wines, said China's investigation would not only hurt Australians but also Chinese businesses who owned wineries in the region.

"China is our biggest market. There are a growing number of wineries and vineyards that are Chinese-owned … so they would be hurting their own people," he said.

Mr Tyrrell said it was possible the attack on the wine industry was retaliation for the Australian government seeking an inquiry into China's handling of COVID-19.

"This is the way China does business; they did it to the barley guys for no reason. We will be exactly the same," he said.

New England Nationals MP Barnaby Joyce said it was hypocritical of Beijing to point the finger at Australia as a source of its economic hardship when the world was suffering due to the -pandemic.

"China's economy and the world's economy would be in a lot better place if the Chinese Government had been … honest in their information and response in the first -instance of the outbreak," he said.

Mr Joyce said the wine dumping claim was a "rubbish" excuse for what was clearly a political move.

"There's no point playing this sort of childish game, it's better to come out and say we're angry because you're not treating us with respect." As Australia is forced to deal with the latest economic threat from China, revellers in Wuhan are acting as if the pandemic is long over with thousands packing into a pool party. The images of people squeezed together are in stark contrast to Sydney's pools which sit virtually empty amid the COVID restrictions.

In the city the Boy Charlton Pool is closed, while at Bondi Icebergs a 24 person limit has been imposed.

Institute of Public Affairs executive director John Roskam said the fact life -appeared to be "returning to normal" in Wuhan showed how disastrous Australia's position was by comparison.

"Australia made the right decision" to pursue the -inquiry into the origins of the coronavirus," he said.

China's handling of the outbreak originating in Wuhan has been continually criticised by high level officials in the US.

Last week US Health Secretary Alex Azar used a controversial visit to Taiwan to issue a scathing assessment of the Chinese Communist Party's response in Wuhan.

"For a month-and-a-half they delayed allowing outside experts in to learn more about the nature of the disease," he said. "(China) should have disclosed the asymptomatic carriage and transmission of the disease (sooner)." In April China's ambassador to Australia Cheng Jingye warned the government its pursuit of a coronavirus inquiry could set off a boycott by Chinese consumers, who may not buy major exports including beef and wine. China then slapped an 80 per cent tariff on Australian barley exports after accusing growers of dumping into the market. Australia strongly -denies the claim.
---
TRADE tensions between China and Australia continue to ramp up with China threatening to slap tariffs on Australian barley - a move that could rip hundreds of millions of dollars from farmers.

The escalation came following calls by the Morrison government for an independent review into the origins of COVID-19.

Trade Minister Simon Birmingham said it was "deeply concerning". "We see no basis upon which the application of duties on to Australian barley producers in response to allegations of dumping or subsidisation could possibly be justified," he said.

China's Ambassador to Australia Cheng Jingye recently threatened that Australia would be hit with economic sanctions if Prime Minister Scott Morrison continued his push for the international inquiry into the origins of COVID-19.

An investigation has been underway in China for 18 months, looking into claims of dumping or subsidisation of Australian barley imports to China.

Minister Birmingham said there was "no basis" to the claim.He said he would be concerned if China was manipulating or incorrectly using anti-dumping laws, designed to stop imports that have been priced below fair market value.
---
AN Australian virus expert who has flown to China to investigate the origins of the coronavirus pandemic has said his team will be looking at events prior to one of the first known outbreaks at a Wuhan animal market.

Dominic Dwyer is a director at NSW Health Pathology and one of 15 global team members who have been sent by the World Health Organisation to try to find out how the virus began its devastating spread. He arrived in China last week and his team's fieldwork will begin once a fortnight's quarantine is over.

"The focus here is really on the very early cases of COVID-19 that occurred in Wuhan to try to identify where they might have picked up the infection," Mr Dwyer told Channel 9's Today yesterday.

The scientists will be looking at how the outbreak at a so-called wet market in the city of Wuhan was sparked.

It was identified as a likely breeding ground for the virus after a cluster was identified there in December 2019.

The connection between the market and the early -coronavirus cluster led scientists to suspect the virus could have spread from an animal to humans, although experts still are not sure of its origins.

"(We are) really concentrating on the first few cases. Even before the outbreak in the wet market in Wuhan," Mr Dwyer said.

"There were cases around beforehand, where did they come from? What sort of history did they have in terms of animal exposure, or other sorts of exposures that we haven't figured out?" Understanding the origins of the coronavirus pandemic could help prevent the next pandemic, the WHO believes.

Mr Dwyer said China had been a welcoming host so far.

"We have been told that we will get access to what we want to, in terms of where we want to go and (what we want to) see," he said. "Places like the market or the research institutes or the hospitals. That's all been promised to us."
---
TIME TO BUILD BUSHFIRE-SAFE FUTURE Linda Silmalis's report on the bushfires royal commission outlines sombre warnings and potential reforms among other highlights (Glimpse into hell, 31/10).

In the 2019-2020 bushfire season, fires destroyed 24 million hectares of land, many bush animals, 3000 houses and, sadly, 33 human lives.

It's trusted our federal, state, and territory leaders will introduce the recommendations of the royal commissioner.

These recommendations will help assist all those responsible for fire prevention, warnings, actions and rescue including ministers, commissioners, fire officers, volunteers, farmers, national parks and support agencies.

The importance of weather fire alerts, safety warnings and safety actions are paramount.

It's also important to be alert to fire lighting in danger zones, arsonists and fire carelessness.

The fair and quick distribution of donated public support money is also important.

Ron Brown, Ballina

Maybe it's time for UN to monitor US elections What an indictment of the American electoral system as its election result hangs on a knife edge despite Democrat Joe Biden leading the popular vote by four million (Joe says bye Don, 6/11).

The electoral college system is archaic and undemocratic. Its winner-takes-all set-up disregards millions of votes in states large and small, Republican or Democratic.

There is no independent control and management of the electoral process across the nation, allowing politicians to interfere with everything from the drawing of the district boundaries to the quantity and location of ballot collection boxes.

Voting is non-compulsory, with huge money and effort spent turning out the base or suppressing the other side's vote and each state sets its own election rules.

Perhaps next time the United Nations should send monitors to the US to ensure free and fair elections.

Han Yang, North Turramurra

Divided land needs a healer The question is not who has won the election in America, but who will be the healer of a nation so sadly divided in a spirit of hatred and fear (Joe says bye Don, 6/11)?

Like Jesus Christ once said, the most clear evidence of people being good is found in those who are peacemakers.

Can Australia join that healing or has the spirit of hate spread to here? So far, Scott Morrison and Anthony Albanese have been careful to stress that keeping and steadying the US alliance is their main goal.

Geoff Hinds, Merrylands

Trump legacy worth respect It now appears that, despite current dramas and court injunctions, Joe Biden's Democrats will be governing the US for the next four years (Joe says bye Don, 6/11).

Americans are on the verge of having elected a 78-year-old decent man with, unfortunately, signs of age-related decline and we can only wish him well.

It is well known that Donald Trump is a maverick-style president but, love him or hate him, he has achieved some excellent results.

Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, US unemployment was at its lowest for many years, there were more jobs available than before, the share market was good and business confidence high.

He started dialogue with North Korea and was responsible for several Arab nations signing agreements to rightfully acknowledge Israel as a separate state in the Middle East. No mean feat and one his predecessors could not achieve.

It is to be hoped his eventual concession speech contains some grace so he may be remembered with a form of respect for the job he did for his country.

Darryl Tutton, Wollstonecraft

Praise for health heroes In a victory for common sense, Australia's vaccination rates have hit a record high with figures revealing five-year-olds are 94.9 per cent fully vaccinated (Vax rate hits high despite fake fears, 1/11).

Programs such as No Jab, No Play and No Jab, No Pay have played a critical role. Apparently high-profile anti-vaxxers' ideas have failed to resonate with parents.

Everyone involved in promoting vaccination should take a bow. Peter Penglis, Kambah, ACT

An investment in future Referring to Vikki Campion's column on the importance of investing in childcare, there has never been a time in modern Australia when "don't breed them if you can't feed them" was good economic policy (Forget the kidults, give kidlings some dough - Vikki Campion, 31/10).

Our economy requires well-educated mature adults. Our birthrate is too low, we produce too few.

Experience shows we need to start investing in adults from a very young age and ensure they benefit from that early start.

Childcare is an opportunity for every "village" to assist parents in educating their kids, a major part of which is learning to interact with their peers.

Peter Egan, Artarmon

Remembering our heroes Your pride of Australia promotion (Thanks a million, 31/10) brought back memories of the terrible bushfires of last summer.

Having been evacuated to Malua Bay beach on December 31, my heroes would have to be our surf club lifesavers.

With literally thousands of evacuees descending upon our little surf club, they managed to register everybody, provide food (donated by locals), keep us informed and, best of all, managed to hand out hot drinks (coffee, etc).

And, all of this with no power, no mobile coverage and under constant threat from the firestorm that surrounded us.

Janice Russell, Malua Bay

Getting pickled at Christmas Thank you for your food feature in todays SMARTdaily section (Something to keep on the side, 6/11).

Every year (at this time) I start pickling (and bottling) vegetables. Pickled cucumbers are a Christmas gift to family and friends rather than the obligatory greetings card.

I recently went to the fruit and vegetable markets at Flemington where I purchased a 5kg box of Lebanese cucumbers. I then spent the weekend pickling and bottling.

I will be returning soon to purchase more fresh produce and to try the recipes in the SMART food column - especially the Sauerkraut - to accompany my slow-cooker corned beef.

Gloria Velleley, Belrose

Let fans call the tune The "it's a wake-up call" response to the Blues loss on Wednesday night is a bit tough (Freddy's dilemma: Is it stick or twist, 6/11).

I thought they played well considering the out-of-position, out- of-form selections they had to contend with.

I suggest that in future we should play the series at the end of the season and let the team be picked by the fans - at least we would be responsible for the angst.

Barrie Laurie, Tweed Heads Don't wine about Adelaide Your editorial commentary which claimed that "it is a well-known fact that nothing good ever happens in Adelaide" is a bit harsh (A home town turnaround, 6/11).

What about all the christenings, marriages and celebrations of lives well lived in "The City of Churches"?

To say nothing of all the wonderful wine.

Douglas Mackenzie, Deakin, ACT

State pride is on the line The State of Origin on Wednesday is not only a defining football match, but the pride of NSW is riding on the outcome. Please boys, keep the series alive. I can't stand the thought of a sardonic Queensland premier and her next crass text to our Gladys if her side wins. Go the Blues.

Marg Swindells, Castle Hill

HAVE YOUR SAYMAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
Beijing's rulers are determined to punish us for standing up for what's right, but here's how we could turn the tables, writes Daniel Walton

Australians don't generally pay close attention to foreign policy - until a foreign government places their job under threat. When that happens, they expect the Australian government to put aside diplomatic niceties and stand up for them.

When the Australian Workers' Union was formed in 1886, I suspect no one gathered mentioned trade with China. Fast forward to today and just about every one of the diverse industries the AWU covers is heavily influenced by our relationship with what's become the world's second largest economy. From our members in steel and aluminium who are exposed to the dumping of underpriced Chinese product, to our members in agriculture and mining who are exposed to the constant threat of arbitrary tariffs, China is the 800 pound gorilla in the room.

So when I urged the Prime Minister to hold his nerve and stand up to China's hostility on trade, I understood the skin our union members have in the game.

The Australian ethos of never backing down to bullies is important. Our coat of arms, after all, features two animals incapable of taking a backward step. But standing up to the Chinese government on trade isn't about posturing or looking tough. It's about protecting a rules-based trading system.

The Chinese Communist Party is currently punishing the industries in which AWU members work as payback for what they perceive as foreign policy rudeness - namely over our advocacy for an international investigation of coronavirus's origins in Wuhan.

Now some politicians and business leaders have argued that we shouldn't rock the economic boat. If we were to back down on our calls for the investigation, the argument goes, wouldn't that just be easier?

Perhaps. In the short term. But what about the precedent?

If we speak out about the grotesque human rights abuses against China's Uighur population, will Beijing whack tariffs on wool? If we ban Huawei from a telecommunications bid, will they stop buying our wine? If Mack Horton publicly calls out another doped-up Chinese swimmer, will they mark up Australian seafood?

Our trading relationship would become a point of leverage for the CCP. And that's when jobs will really be at risk. Australians can, and always should, back ourselves to compete on a level playing field.

So our national interest lies in defending that playing field. And national interest is what this is all about. We should reject the nonsense frame that this debate is about rational business interests versus racist working Australians.

It's insulting to suggest working Australians are so unsophisticated they can't tell the difference between Chinese people and the Chinese Communist Party.

Australian workers see CCP belligerence for what it is and billionaire self interest for what it is. They expect their leaders to represent neither.

Of course we should seek to keep trading with China. But regardless of what deals we strike, we should be ever mindful that authoritarian dictatorships are inherently fickle.

Democracies hold that the rules should trump the authority of any leader. China quite explicitly believes the opposite, which makes them unreliable. So, long term, we should ensure our fortunes are not tied to China alone.

That means retaking our status as a nation that makes things. Becoming a manufacturing powerhouse will require a variety of measures and excellent work is being done by the National COVID-19 Coordination Commission.

However, there are three easy wins available this year that could turbocharge our manufacturing sector.

Firstly, procurement. When we build roads, bridges, tunnels, schools and hospitals, it should be done using Australian-made products. You would think the idea of spending Australian tax dollars to support local Australian business would be common sense. Yet in recent years we've seen all manner of imported products in our infrastructure builds, from Spanish train carriages to dumped Chinese steel in our iconic buildings. With a pandemic-inspired infrastructure boom on the cards, we need to ensure Australian tax dollars power Australian industries.

Secondly, we need to seize Australia's sovereign advantage: affordable energy. We are blessed to live in a nation with abundant energy reserves: coal, gas, uranium, hydrogen, renewables - we have it all.

Yet somehow we manage to charge our businesses the world's highest prices for power. It's insane and it needs to end. Ensuring that our manufacturers have access to Australian gas at a globally advantageous rate would be the most obvious place to start. Instead of selling LNG to China at a discount, how about we keep some of that gas here to power Australian jobs.

Thirdly, we need to continue to block dumping. The Chinese government, for example, considers it advantageous to produce low-quality steel at below cost to prop up employment in key regions. That's fine, but we shouldn't allow that below-cost steel to be dumped on our market and undermine Australia's steel industry.

If we do these three things, and government creates the appropriate incentives for investment, the 2020s could be a decade characterised by the rise of Australian manufacturing. Australians will be able to proudly buy things made locally, Australian-made products can gain a name across the globe, and we can start freeing ourselves from the worrying market power we've handed over to an authoritarian regime. Daniel Walton is national secretary of the AWU
---
AUSTRALIA'S wine war with China may be escalated to the World Trade Organisation after Beijing announced it would continue massive tariffs on some winemakers from Down Under.

On Friday, China's Ministry of Commerce confirmed it would impose a tariff of 200 per cent as "anti-dumping measures on some Australian wine imports from March 28 for (another) five years".

China has previously acc-used Australian wine producers of "dumping", or lowering prices below the cost of manufacturing in a bid to -increase market share in its gigantic economy.

Beijing has accused the federal government of subsidising Australian wines in order for them to be exported and sold cheaply in China.

This is seen as an excuse to punish Australia for its temerity to question the origins of the COVID-19 pandemic.

Federal Trade Minister Dan Tehan has previously rejected suggestions Australia's wine industry was subsidised.

Department of Foreign -Affairs and Trade officials told Senate Estimates the value of Australian trade with China for almost all industries had plummeted by 40 per cent. Wine exports have sunk to less than $1 million.
---
UNFAIR DEAL BEIJING officials gave no warning before slapping an import- ban on four Australian meat processors now stuck in limbo for months amid escalating tensions over China's handling of the pandemic.

The operators were blindsided to learn China had suspended their licences to export with immediate effect yesterday, due to technical labelling and certification issues dating back more than a year.

The sudden trade block came just weeks after a warning from the Chinese ambassador to Australia that exports including red meat, wine and education would be targeted if the Morrison government did not end its call for an independent inquiry into the origins of COVID-19.

Chinese newspaper the Global Times foreshadowed "economic repercussions" in an editorial published before the licence suspension that accused Australia of "joining in on the China blame game".

The ban also followed China's announcement on Sunday it planned to introduce an 80 per cent tariff on Australian barley, which would cripple the industry.

The suspended meat processors, NSW Northern Co-operative Meat Company (NCMC), and three Queensland meatworks - Pastoral Company, Beef City and Dinmore - are working with the federal government to resolve issues so they can re-enter the Chinese market.

But NCMC chief executive Simon Stahl said it could be two months before the company can resume exports to China, which accounts for 10 per cent of its business.

The Casino-based company employs 900 people and exports red meat to 26 nations. Mr Stahl said he received a call from his Shanghai office late on Monday afternoon to say there were "murmurings in the market" about problems.

NCMC only learned of the suspension from the Australian Meat Industry Council. Mr Stahl said NCMC would work through the concerns via the Department of Agriculture, and "didn't want to read between the lines" as to whether politics was behind the ban. "I will stay out of that," he said.

Total NSW beef exports to China were worth $736 million last year. Trade Minister Simon Birmingham said it was "disappointing" China did not notify Australia before the suspension- came into effect.

"The reason given for this suspension relates to instances dating back over more than a year of minor technical errors in relation to labelling or other technical requirements," he said. "My expectation is the technical issues, we will find have all been addressed." Chinese foreign ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian last night blamed the ban on quarantine and inspection failures.

"Chinese customs has continuously found that multiple batches of beef products exported to China by individual Australian companies have violated the inspection and quarantine requirements," he said.But he called Australia's demand for a coronavirus inquiry "erroneous words and deeds" and warned against "using the epidemic to engage in political manipulation".
---
THE CHINESE EMBASSY HAS VOICED ITS DISPLEASURE WITH THE TELEGRAPH'S CORONAVIRUS COVERAGE. HERE TIM BLAIR RESPONDS TO THE CONCERNS

THE Daily Telegraph this week received a letter from the Australian Consulate General of the People's Republic of China, who took gentle issue with our excellent coverage of the coronavirus crisis.

Following is a point-by-point response to the Consulate General and China's communist dictatorship.

"Recently The Daily Telegraph has published a number of reports and opinions about China's response to COVID-19 that are full of ignorance, prejudice and arrogance." If a state-owned newspaper in China received this kind of complaint, subsequent days would involve journalists waking up in prison with their organs harvested.

"Tracing the origin of the virus is a scientific issue that requires professional, science-based assessment." Sure it does. How professional and science-based was the claim published on March 12 by China's foreign ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian that "it might be US Army who brought the epidemic to Wuhan"?

"The origin of the virus is still undetermined, and the World Health Organisation has named the novel coronavirus 'COVID-19'." The World Health Organisation also appointed Zimbabwean murderer Robert Mugabe as its Goodwill Ambassador, and declared on March 2 that the "stigma" of the coronavirus "is more dangerous than the virus itself". The World Health Organisation does a lot of stupid stuff.

"So what is the real motive behind your attempt to repeatedly link the virus to China and even stating that the novel coronavirus was 'made in China'?" Our motive is accuracy. That's why we don't link the virus to Bognor Regis or say it was "made in Panama".

"The people of Wuhan made a huge effort and personal sacrifice to stop the spread of the epidemic." Wuhan's Dr Li Wenliang indeed made a huge effort to warn people about the coronavirus outbreak. Then, as The New York Times reports: "In early January, he was called in by both medical officials and the police, and forced to sign a statement denouncing his warning as an unfounded and illegal rumor." And now he's dead, so that's "personal sacrifice" covered as well.

"Nevertheless … to capture attention and gain more internet hits, you called Wuhan the 'Zombieland' and Wuhan seafood market the 'bat market'. How low can you go?" In the civilised world, "Bradman bats and bats and bats" is a famous newspaper banner. In Wuhan, it's the name of a restaurant.

"The effectiveness of China's epidemic prevention and control has fully underlined the people-centred philosophy of the Communist Party of China and the strong advantages of the Chinese system." In 2018, Amnesty International reported that China executed more citizens than the rest of the world combined. Please tell us more about your "people-centred philosophy" and how many bullets it requires.

"Instead of admitting and facing facts, the articles in your newspaper have wantonly attacked and smeared the CPC and the Chinese government with vicious language." And yet we haven't been executed! Where's the justice in that? "Is your judgment based on the wellbeing of the people or do you have an ideological prejudice?" We will admit to an ideological prejudice against deadly tyranny. It's a tragic failing on our part.

"Since 3 January, China has been updating the WHO and the international community in a timely and transparent manner." On January 14, following 11 days of "timely and transparent" updates, the WHO broadcast this ridiculous Chinese misinformation: "Preliminary investigations conducted by the Chinese authorities have found no clear evidence of human-to-human transmission of the novel coronavirus." "The epidemic is spreading rapidly around the globe, and China is doing its utmost to support other severely affected countries." Thousands of Chinese-made coronavirus testing kits and medical masks exported to Spain, Turkey and the Netherlands turned out to be "below standard or defective", according to the BBC. And the ABC this week reported that more than 800,000 masks have been seized by Australian Border Force officers after being "found to be counterfeit or otherwise faulty". Thanks for all your help, guys.

"Virus respects no borders." Why, then, did China close its own borders on March 28 - even while claiming victory over the spread of coronavirus?

"You have repeatedly questioned the WHO's positive assessment of China's epidemic prevention and control, but surely you know that the WHO is the most authoritative international organisation in global public health, with more than 190 members including Australia?" Keep an eye on that number, sunshine.

"In disregard of the authoritative information provided by China and the WHO's professional opinions, you instead quoted several so-called 'strategic analysts' … were you aware that the institution where these people work have been exposed as long accepting financial support from the US government …?" The US last year contributed nearly $900 million to the holy WHO. Your point, sir?

"Your recent coverage on the epidemic in China are exaggerated, full of irresponsible rumours and highly politicised."Naughty us. Please send an official Dr Li Wenliang "unfounded and illegal rumour" denunciation statement so we can sign it and be on our way.
---
MARKETS Cautious optimism among experts

Leading fund managers and advisers to the nation's rich---listers are cautiously optimistic about the economic outlook for 2021, with value stocks exposed to the Australian housing market and local economy tipped to outperform.

After central banks rushed to slash interest rates across the world and $20 trillion in monetary and fiscal stimulus provided by governments globally in 2020, sharemarkets are expected to continue their upward trajectory in 2021.

The comments came as Australian shares ended a tumultuous year by almost wiping out the year's losses, while the Aussie dollar has surged back above US77c.

The S&P/ASX 200 closed on a weaker note on Thursday, finishing a shortened session down 1.43 per cent, or 95.3 points, at 6587.10. This took total losses for the calendar year to 1.45 per cent, but marked a stunning recovery from the global market shocks inflicted early in the year by the COVID-19 pandemic.

The benchmark ended down 8 per cent from its record closing high on February 20, but surged 45 per cent from its COVID-savaged low of just 4546 points on March 23.

Information technology was the biggest moving sector in the local market, up 57 per cent on the year, followed by materials - which covers the big miners of BHP, Rio Tinto and Fortescue - up 14.6 per cent. Banks and financials were down 7.5 per cent, while Energy - which covers oil and gas producers - was off 29 per cent.

The biggest mover in the S&P/ASX 200 was buy now, pay later juggernaut Afterpay. up more than 300 per cent to $118, followed by online retailer Kogan, up 150 per cent to $19. Miners Mineral Resources rallied 127 per cent to $37.45 and Fortescue 119 per cent to $23.43 on the back of a surge in iron ore prices.

The worst hit on the benchmark index were travel stocks, with Flight Centre down 60 per cent on the year to $15.85, while shopping mall operator Unibail-Westfield was down 54 per cent to $5.10 and Webjet was off 46 per cent to $5.07.

Paul Skamvougeras, head of equities at Perpetual Investments, said the current Australian market valuation was expensive relative to history and the risk was that the anticipated rebound in earnings post the COVID pandemic did not eventuate as expected.

"The biggest tail risk for markets is rising interest rates driven by inflation. Although a low probability, this would impact high asset prices," he said.

Perpetual was cautiously optimistic on the outlook for the Australian economy for 2021, he said.

"Given our view on the economy, we are invested in domestic Aussie cyclicals such as builders and banks. We expect the Australian dollar to be strong and are underweight US dollar earners," he said.

"As the economy rebounds in 2021 and corporate confidence returns we expect to see large-scale merger and acquisition activity, driven by historically low borrowing costs." Geoff Wilson, chairman and founder of $3.5bn fund Wilson Asset Management, said the sectors representing value in the Australian market in 2021 would be domestic tourism, housing and infrastructure. "The housing sector will be driven by a combination of record low interest rates, government stimulus measures and improving consumer confidence, to underpin both new and existing dwelling demand," he said.

"Companies we like here include Ingenia Communities, Fletcher Building, Brickworks, Reliance Worldwide, Australian Finance Group and Johns Lyng. A number of these companies will benefit from additional tailwinds provided by infrastructure-related fiscal measures, along with Downer and Maas Group." Tom Millner, director and portfolio manager at Contact Asset Management, said he would maintain his focus in 2021 on quality companies with sustainable dividends and growing earnings. "We are going to see, we think, some good results out of the better quality companies like Woolworths, Wesfarmers, CBA, ARB, Reece, Resmed and Harvey Norman," he said.

"And alignment is a big theme in these environments. You want management and the board to own shares in the companies because they are representing the shareholders and their best interests are of the shareholders and when they are shareholders themselves they tend to make sensible decisions about acquisitions, debt levels and payout ratios." Armytage Private portfolio director Bradley King said it was unlikely that the boom from mid 2020 to the end of the year could be repeated.

But Mr King said some resources stocks could continue to do well in 2021, especially those minerals exposed to battery use such as lithium and nickel.

LOSERS Flight Centre " 60% to $15.85

Unibail-Rodamco-Westfield " 54% to $5.10 IOOF Holdings " 51% to $3.52 Oil Search " 47% to $3.71 Webjet " 46% to $5.07 Origin Energy " 44% to $4.76 Treasury Wine Estate " 42% to $9.40 AGL Energy " 42% to $11.95 IAG " 39% to $4.70 Bravura Solution " 38% to $3.22

WINNERS Afterpay ▲ 303% to $118.00 Kogan.com ▲ 150% to $19.00 Mineral Resources ▲ 127% to $37.45 Fortescue Metals ▲ 119% to $23.43 Netwealth ▲ 104% to $15.94 Polynovo ▲ 97% to $3.88 NEXTDC ▲ 86% to $12.23 Xero ▲ 84% to $146.82 OZ Minerals ▲▲ 79% to $18.88 Lynas Rare Earths ▲ 73% to $3.98
---
AGRIBUSINESS Grain import cut not so crucial CHINA has slashed its Australian wheat imports to an almost 10-year low as Beijing ramps up its attack on Australian farm commodities and threatens to disrupt international trade worth hundreds of millions of dollars a year.

China imported 880 tonnes of Australian wheat in November - the lowest since 2011 - according to customs data, as tensions between Beijing and Canberra show no signs of abating. Australia exports about $4.6bn worth of wheat a year globally, with China accounting for about 10 per cent.

Beijing's tightening on Australian wheat comes amid a blockbuster crop for Australian farmers, with production forecast to more than double this season to about 31 million tonnes, according to the Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics (ABARE).

China's communist regime has already slapped punitive tariffs or banned a range of Australian products from barley, timber and beef, to wine and seafood after Scott Morrison sought an inquiry into the origins of COVID-19 and Australia's foreign interfer-ence laws angered Beijing.

It comes as the world wheat price is forecast to surge 11 per cent this financial year to an average of $US245 ($322.50) a tonne, reflecting a fall in production in some major exporting countries in 2020-21, and dryness during the 2021-22 winter crop planting window in the US, the European Union and Russia, ABARE said in its December quarterly report.

High domestic grain prices are expected also to result in China's total wheat import demand being the highest in 25 years, at eight million tonnes.

"This demand is likely to be met by wheat exports from the US and the Black Sea -region," ABARE said.

"Smaller exportable surpluses from these major exporters will provide Australia with an opportunity to meet demand in other markets," it said.

Australian wheat is highly sought after in Asian markets, and more than 30 per cent is used in Asian noodles thanks to Australian wheat's starch and protein quality.

Indonesia is the biggest buyer of Australian wheat, with exports worth about $739m a year, more than double the Chinese wheat trade, which is worth about $346m. Other top Asian markets for Australian wheat include the Philippines ($465m), Vietnam ($404m) and Korea ($361m).

Australian grain growers have been anticipating China to target wheat but, unlike barley where China has historically bought 60-70 per cent of Australia's crop, it hasn't been a crucial market for Australian wheat. ABARE warned of continuing disruptions in Australia's trade with China, "despite the economic benefits trade brings to both countries", with the biggest hits to barley and wine.
---
MARKETS Moody's expects damage repair A LEADING ratings agency says Australia's economy will not emerge from the coronavirus pandemic permanently weaker, paving the way for the country to remain one of the few AAA-rated nations.

In a report on Wednesday, Moody's Investors Service said that despite a record contraction in the June quarter, Australia was "unlikely to face a lasting drop in potential growth or weakening in fiscal strength over the longer term".

The vote of confidence from one of the three major international ratings agencies comes as the nation charts a surprisingly brisk path out of the COVID-19 recession.

Moody's said the federal government's "substantial policy response is helping viable companies to survive the related shock to demand and to avoid the destruction of productive capacity".

"Stimulus in response to the coronavirus outbreak does not significantly threaten fiscal strength over the longer term," its report said.

"Rather, the package highlights Australia's flexibility and capacity to use fiscal policy to support its credit profile in a difficult global economic -environment." But Moody's warned that "a major driver of Australia's potential growth rate will be the extent to which productivity growth picks up from the relatively weak levels experienced before the pandemic" - underlining the need for further policy reform as the economy transitions off emergency income support.

A loss of the nation's AAA rating would result in the government having to pay more for its debt.

The update from Moody's came as the Australian sharemarket rallied to be near where it started the year at after Wall Street's blue-chip index reached historic heights.

Australia's key stockmarket benchmark, the ASX 200, broke through 6700 points in early trade on Wednesday before finishing 0.5 per cent stronger at 6683 points - just shy of the 6684.1 points it was at when 2020 began.

On the US market, the Dow Jones index broke through 30,000 points for the first time, underpinned by the trio of successful vaccine trials announced in recent weeks.

Market sentiment was also boosted by outgoing President Donald Trump's decision to co-operate with a transition of power to President-elect Joe Biden.

The ASX has given investors a wild ride in 2020.

It surged in the early months of the year to hit a record close of 7162.5 points in late February.

It then plunged 36 per cent as COVID-19 became a pandemic, then rose steadily as interest rates were slashed and government's across the globe unleashed unprecedented spending.

CommSec analyst James Tao said the ASX 200 had staged "quite a recovery" since late February and was tracking to post its best November in 32 years.

Among the gainers on Wednesday was Woodside Petroleum, which rose 2.96 per cent to $23.31, Santos, which gained 2.67 per cent to $6.53, Origin Energy, which put on 3.96 per cent to $5.25 and Whitehaven Coal jumped 10.7 per cent to $1.55.

ANZ lifted 3 per cent to $23.66, Commonwealth Bank appreciated 1.49 per cent to $82.37, National Australia Bank strengthened 3.09 per cent to $24.05 and Westpac advanced 2.15 per cent to $20.89.

Rio Tinto added 1.12 per cent to $104.28, BHP lifted 3.03 per cent to $39.46 and Fortescue was up 2.82 per cent at $18.60.

Gold stocks retreated again after being among the worst performers on Tuesday. THE AUSTRALIAN
---
The NRL clubs hold the whip hand in player negotiations as the world health pandemic and doubts over the salary cap make it a buyer's market, writes Fatima Kdouh

Almost 100 off-contract players' futures remain uncertain - including Josh Addo-Carr, Benji Marshall and the Morris twins - as they prepare to flood the open market at the end of the season as the COVID-19 pandemic creates a buyer's market for clubs.

Most NRL clubs aren't rushing to sign free agents and fill the spots in their 30 rosters for next season.

It means many off-contract players face a nervous wait over the summer. The NRL and RLPA have agreed in-principle to retain clubs' 30-man rosters for 2021, with two to four development players, and have advised clubs to work towards that number.

However, a looming reduction in the salary cap will trigger a flurry of off-season movement - meaning as well as free agents, a host of contracted players are likely to have new clubs for 2021.

"It really is a buyer's market at the moment with all the uncertainty," one NRL player manager said.

"Clubs are saying 'this is what we are offering, take it or leave it'. Then you have players who, because of COVID, haven't been able to play reserve grade this year." Warriors recruitment guru Peter O'Sullivan said the uncertainty around the make-up of next season's squad sizes had left clubs wary ahead of the usual off-season transfer frenzy.

"The mooted change to the roster size from 30 has led to clubs being conservative in approaching the market," O'Sullivan said.

"But I don't think roster sizes should be in any way decreased. You look at the numbers clubs have had to use this year, it's far in excess of 30 so you can't decrease it. That is only going to exacerbate the problem or the struggle that these free agents are facing to secure their future." Further muddying the waters is the lack of a second tier, with both the NSW and Queensland Cup competitions called off for 2020.

"There are some good players that I haven't seen play in over a year, so making decisions on those players is difficult enough and if you haven't seen them play it makes it impossible to sign them," O'Sullivan said.

"It's a matter of out of sight, out of mind. The big thing for me over the years has been watching the NSW and Queensland Cup semi-finals because the best players in that arena are first graders. Players like Lachlan Burr played at the Bulldogs and was part of their grand final-winning side two years ago and was the best player through that grand final series. Toby Rudolf is in that same boat. Without reserve grade you don't see players like that so you can't sign them."

THE GREAT Melbourne captain Cameron Smith, the NRL's record holder for most games, headlines an unprecedented free agency list as he contemplates retirement or creating a tug-of-war between the Storm and the Brisbane Broncos.

While Smith is likely to retire, his final decision will have a direct impact on the futures of Storm pair Brandon Smith and Harry Grant. After a breakthrough season at Wests Tigers, Grant and would not be prepared to wait for an opportunity at Melbourne. Brandon Smith has made it clear he sees himself as an 80-minute hooker. If forced to play second fiddle to Grant, he could be on a lookout for a new home, with the likes of Canterbury keen.

ORIGIN STAR Josh Addo-Carr, who remains contracted to Melbourne until the end of 2021, is desperate to return to Sydney on compassionate grounds.

But things are at a standstill because the Storm will only release him if they can land a suitable replacement for the NSW Origin winger.

While the Wests Tigers' interest in electric winger Addo-Carr appears to have cooled, South Sydney is being mooted as an option, depending on the future of teenage sensation Joseph Suaalii.

SONS OF GUNS Rising playmaker Tristan Sailor is set to make the biggest decision of his young career.

The Daily Telegraph understands Parramatta are interested in Sailor, the son of former Broncos and Wallabies legend Wendell Sailor. But the Eels will have to fend off interest from at least two other clubs, including Canterbury and Wests Tigers. Sailor, who headlines a list of almost 100 players unsigned for season 2021 after being let go by St George Illawarra, has emerged as one of the hottest free agents on the market.

Cooper Johns: The son of Matthew Johns made his NRL debut in Round 20 and is likely to stay at Melbourne in season 2021.

Albert and Jamil Hopoate: The sons of Manly legend John Hopoate are facing very different future prospects. While Jamil's future at Brisbane is uncertain, Albert is in negotiations to stay at Manly but the Warriors are keeping a close eye on proceedings.

YOUNG & RESTLESS With next season's $9.9 million salary cap to shrink anywhere between five to 10 per cent, players who are likely to make up the last five places in the top 30 roster are facing the prospect of accepting less money.

Alex Seyfarth: The Tigers are at risk of letting another talented youngster slip through their fingers in the same fashion the club lost Ryan Papenhuyzen, Addo-Carr, James Tedesco and Aaron Woods. The under-18s and 20s NSW Blues forward is in negotiations but the Concord club is yet to lock him in for 2021.

Adam Keighran: The Roosters have shown some early interest in the New Zealand Warriors five-eighth but talks are not likely to progress until after the finals series.

Danny Levi: The former Newcastle and Manly hooker, who has played 103 NRL games, has fielded interest from several Sydney clubs but is yet to receive a formal offer for season 2021.

THE HIGH-PROFILE STARS Jordan Rapana: It is understood the flyer had leapfrogged Addo-Carr as a target at the Tigers but now looks set to stay in Canberra.

Benji Marshall: The Tigers great generated interest from two non-Sydney outfits and has a full-time Fox League gig on the table but is likely to make a decision about his future in the next two weeks.

Josh and Brett Morris: The veteran backs are both eager to play on in season 2021 and the Roosters are just as keen to have them on the roster.

ON THE FRINGE It is understood Parramatta is set to farewell forward David Gower, while the future of the club's longest current-serving player, Peni Terepo, is unclear as he deals with health issues around epilepsy.

Nathan Peats: The former NSW Blues hooker won't be at the Gold Coast in 2021 and could be a target for Bulldogs coach Trent Barrett, who is searching for a playmaker and to add more experience to his roster.

Richie Kennar: The centre has a place in new Brisbane coach Kevin Walter's roster but is testing the market before making a final call.

Drew Hutchison: The 25-year played five games in an injury-ravaged Roosters outfit in season 2020. While there is a chance Hutchinson remains at Bondi, the playmaker is open to joining another rival where there would be more opportunities to play regular first grade.

Cameron King: The Sharks hooker will return from an ACL injury next year for the Townsville Blackhawks after agreeing to join the Intrust Super Cup outfit.

NORTHERN LIGHTS Manly's Joel Thompson and Greg Inglis have signed contracts to play in England, while Eels playmaker Jai Field also looks to have secured a deal overseas, where the speedster is set to link up with the Wigan Warriors.

Ricky Leutele: Melbourne have shown interest in keeping the premiership-winning centre but any decision will be delayed until Toronto Wolfpack, where Leutele is contracted, has its own future sorted.

PLAYERS OFF CONTRACT IN 2020 BRONCOS Jamil Hopoate, Jordan Kahu, Richie Kennar, Rhys Kennedy, Issac Luke, Sean O'Sullivan, Ben Te'o, Ilikena Vudogo.

CANBERRA Sebastian Kris, Michael Oldfield, Jordan Rapana, Kurt Baptiste.

CANTERBURY Jack Cogger, Tim Lafai, Marcelo Montoya, Aiden Tolman, Sauaso Sue, Isaiah Tass.

CRONULLA Mawene Hiroti, Kayleb Milne, Scott Sorensen, Brayden Trindall.

GOLD COAST Dale Copley, Keegan Hipgrave, Nathan Peats, Tyrone Roberts, Sam Stone.

MANLY Albert Hopoate, Luke Metcalf, Samuel Smith, Danny Levi, Brendan Elliott, Tony Williams.

KNIGHTS Brodie Jones, Josh King, Mason Lino, Tautau Moga, Tyronne Roberts-Davis, Connor Watson.

PARRAMATTA Rhys Davies, David Gower, George Jennings, Jaeman Salmon, Will Smith, Brad Takairangi, Peni Terepo.

SYDNEY ROOSTERS Jake Friend, Drew Hutchison, Matt Ikuvalu, Lachlan Lam, Brett Morris, Josh Morris, Sonny Bill Williams.

PANTHERS Caleb Aekins, Dean Blore, Tyrone May, Braydon McGrady, Malakai Watene-Zelezniak.

ST GEORGE ILLAWARRA Jacob Host, Joe Lovodua, Tristan Sailor, Kaide Ellis.

WESTS TIGERS Sam McIntyre, Alex Seyfarth, Benji Marshall, Oliver Clark, Matt Eisenhuth, Elijah Taylor, Robert Jennings, Dylan Smith.

SOUTH SYDNEY Tom Amone, Cory Denniss, Kurt Dillon, Patrick Mago, Ky Rodwell.

WARRIORS Lachlan Burr, Patrick Herbert, Gerald Beale, Nathaniel Roache, Leivaha Pulu, Adam Keighran, Isaiah Papali'i, Peta Hiku, King Vuniyayawa.

NORTH QUEENSLAND John Asiata, Tom Opacic, Daniel Russell, Javid Bowen.

STORM Josh Addo-Carr (contracted until 2021 but negotiating a release), Sandor Earl, Cooper Johns, Max King, Brenko Lee, Ricky Leutele, Marion Seve, Cameron Smith, Christian Welch.

GRAND TOTAL: 97
---
EXCLUSIVE - NINE BOSS ENJOYS LANGUID LUNCH WITH EA AS OPPONENTS CIRCLE

FOLLOWING a roller- coaster four years in the job, some members of Nine Entertainment's board are now pushing openly for the removal of company CEO Hugh Marks.

In a week in which "Hollywood Hugh" Marks addressed Nine investors and indicated the media company is ready to cut ties with embattled long-time sports partner the NRL, Nine insiders spoke about rising panic within the company.

Executives and board directors alike have become increasingly concerned about Nine's revised business strategy under Marks, which sees it move away from the free-to-air broadcaster's grassroots television audience, and the CEO's lack of attention to longstanding business alliances.

Former Fairfax publishing executive Chris Janz, Nine's chief digital and publishing officer, is currently favoured as Marks' replacement.

Former Nine CEO David Gyngell is also rated an outside chance of returning to the company for a third time to lift plummeting morale borne of what internal sources call Marks' remote and spreadsheet-obsessed management style.

There are also concerns his lack of industry pedigree is starting to be evident in his business decisions, something that makes TV-hardened Gyngell an attractive alternative even in the short term.

Gyngell and TV presenter wife Leila moved to Byron Bay after he quit the TV landscape but friends say they are reconsidering their home base as they begin evaluating school options for children Ted, now seven, and Gwendolen, almost six.

Yet despite the threatened coup, Marks put rumbling dissent - and month-on-month declining revenue - aside on Wednesday to treat his attentive executive assistant to a picnic in a Sydney park.

Marks and his EA Jane Routledge stretched out in the sun at a Clifton Gardens park, laughing easily during a long, languid lunch.

The newly separated media executive lay down on the grass and relaxed during their first public sighting since reports of Marks's growing reliance on his EA first leaked from inside the Nine bunker six months ago.

Dressed casually in jeans, runners and polo shirt and carrying fish and chips from nearby Balmoral Beach takeaway Bottom of the Harbour, Marks arrived on foot about 2pm for the lunch with mother-of-two Routledge.

According to TV sources, the blonde, who has a reputation for being hyper protective of her boss when the pair are ensconced in Nine's Willoughby office, has been accompanying Marks on out-of-office expeditions since January 2019 when the pair were sighted together at an Australian Open reception in Melbourne.

In November Marks confirmed he had separated from his wife of more than two decades, Gayle, mother of his four children.

"This is a private family matter and a painful time for us all. Please respect our privacy and in particular that of our children," he told this newspaper.

A Nine spokeswoman maintained that despite the separation, Marks continued to live in the family home in Artarmon with his wife and younger children, the youngest of whom is believed to be about 13, and asked for the report to be held over to give the couple time to sell their family home.

Marks has emphatically denied being in a relationship with his EA. Soon after, Marks quit the family home and moved into a rental house in nearby Mosman.

The CEO, whose remuneration in the year to June 2019 was $3.2 million and who owns $3.2 million in Nine shares at the current $1.40 market price (up a bolshie $1.2 million from $1.9 million following his NRL-related advice to the ASX on March 30 when Nine shares were trading at 86c), has spent recent months selling off family assets including a luxury retreat near Berry which sold in February for more than $4 million.

Two weeks ago, on April 21, he handed over 216,216 Nine shares - valued at $250,800 - to his estranged wife Gayle, a lawyer, as part of the couple's divorce.

Routledge, in the meantime, has quit the family home she previously shared with husband Kit and two daughters in Frenchs Forest.

British migrant Routledge joined Nine in November 2015, the same month Marks started in the CEO role, after quitting her job at Warner Bros Australia to work for Marks, a grandson of high-end Sydney jeweller Percy Marks, and before 2015 the boss of TV distribution company Southern Star Group.

A Nine spokeswoman said the pair were on a working lunch. It was a nice day and they had fish and chips in the park, the spokeswoman said.

Tied to the loss of confidence by some in Marks - on whose watch a 60 Minutes crew had to be rescued from a jail in Beirut in 2016, the Today show's ratings have collapsed and Nine's digital strategy has changed and changed again - is the loss of confidence in Nine chairman Peter Costello, former federal treasurer and Liberal MP.

Costello outraged journalists within Nine's merged "always independent" Fairfax ranks last year by supporting a $10,000-a-head Liberal Party fundraiser at Nine HQ.

His support of 2GB broadcaster Alan Jones despite the collapse of revenue in Nine's newly acquired radio division, had also caused deep division within Nine's executive.

Veteran media war dog Nick Falloon, currently Nine's deputy chairman and a former Nine CFO, is favoured to replace Costello.

As chairman of Fairfax Media, Falloon was one of the architects of the 2018 $4 billion Nine-Fairfax merger and is one of the most seasoned players in the current media landscape.

Having gambled against the early recovery of Nine's long-time broadcast partner the NRL in March, when Marks informed the ASX Nine stood to make $130 million in savings with the COVID-19 cancellation of NRL games, the Nine CEO told a Macquarie investor conference on Tuesday the media company had "agreed to nothing this year" concerning NRL broadcast rights. The advice was a slap in the face to the NRL which for three decades has bolstered Nine's bottom line with its rugby league State of Origin series, traditionally three of the top 10 highest rating TV events of the free-to-air calendar year.Insiders say "Hollywood Hugh's" decision to put the NRL on notice has dumbfounded Nine stalwarts coming, as it does, just two years after Marks raised eyebrows during broadcast rights negotiations with Cricket Australia. Nine lost the cricket rights when it was outmanoeuvred by Seven and Fox Sports, bringing to an end Nine's 40-year history with a game that has long been part of the broadcaster's DNA, something for which Kerry Packer was prepared to risk bankruptcy to acquire for his Nine Network.
---
PARRAMATTA EELS V BRISBANE BRONCOS 7.50PM TONIGHT

FOOTY'S finally back and so are the fans - all 300 million of them watching in loungerooms around the world.

In what will be a watershed moment for rugby league, the NRL's stunning eight-game return over the next four days is set to be watched by a -record global TV audience of 300 million sport-starved people- in what is expected to be the largest TV ratings for a single round in the sport's 112-year history.

Industry insiders predict about 30 to 40 million people around the world would tune in to each bone-rattling match over the next four days as rugby league becomes the first football code in the -English-speaking world to -return to the playing fields and TV.

NRL matches will be shown in more than 70 countries, including the US, France, Britain, Papua New Guinea and Uganda.

At 7.50pm tonight when Brisbane and Parramatta kick off at Suncorp Stadium, rugby league will become just the third major sporting league in the world, along with football's K League in South Korea and Germany's Bundesliga, to resume post COVID-19.

Matches will also be shown in such far-flung countries as Nauru, Angola and The Netherlands-. Some countries have aired NRL games in recent years but matches have already been promoted heavily this week.

'UNIQUE OPPORTUNITY' The increase in viewership could not be accurately predicted but insiders believe it could be by as much as 40 to 50 per cent.

"There's certainly a unique opportunity to attract new fans to our game globally," acting NRL CEO Andrew Abdo said.

"While it has been the loyalty- of our fans here at home that has been driving us to resume the season, we will be one of only a few live sports around the world that will be playing in June and July.

"We know fans are craving live sport so we're excited about the global audience we could attract with the resumption of the competition and the exposure that will bring to our corporate partners.

"We are also expecting a strong take-up of the Watch NRL app which allows fans to stream games live throughout the world. It's a credit to our chairman Peter V'landys and the commission for their unwavering commitment to bring the game back on May 28." NRL officials hope to gain a slice of the massive US sports market during the shutdown of major codes including the NBA, and have already seen a spike in media interest. An article- on forbes.com this week was headlined: "Americans, this is why the NRL should be your new favourite sport." "Rugby league is the lesser-known but infinitely superior form of rugby and, if you like your sport high-octane, occasionally- violent, endlessly authentic and frequently spectacular, then you need to tune in this Thursday for National- Rugby League," it read.

"Rugby league is like watching the NFL, except after every down they immediately have to get up and do it again, with no break, and nobody wears padding."

A SIGNIFICANT SPIKE Ratings in coronavirus-hit England are also expected to spike significantly with Super League yet to recommence.

"About 80 to 90 million people would have access to the games in America and Europe-, maybe more," a TV source said. "From that you have to ask yourself how many would watch it.

"Many may not understand the game but they are craving live sport around the world right now.

"Australians are watching the Bundesliga. Why? Because it's the only live sport being shown. I would imagine about 30 to 40 million people would watch each game for longer than 15 minutes.

"That would be equivalent to watching one quarter of an NFL match. "Way back in 2011, State of Origin and the NRL grand final reached 40 million households in the US and 48 million through Europe.

"They might not come back when their preferred sport returns but, this weekend, they will be watching." The NRL has jumped back first ahead of the AFL and is the first sport to be played since March 23.

Despite the hype, Nine and Fox are reluctant to predict their NRL ratings in Australia for this round for fear they may fall short.

While fans will tune in, broadcasters will still have a challenge ahead to create the game-day atmosphere without supporters in the stands.

'GREAT TO BE BACK' Sydney Roosters coach Trent Robinson said ravenous sports fans around the world would tune into rugby league.

"There has been a lot of work from the NRL to get back on and we want to represent- our game well in some clear air space around the world," said Robinson.

"There has been some interest around rugby league from friends who live overseas. It will be good to get our game back on represented the right way. It's great to be back.

"We want to represent rugby league and there's no better game for us than Friday night's match against Souths to restart the season." Former NSW skipper and coach Laurie Daley knows the NRL cannot miss a wonderful opportunity: "This is a great chance to showcase our game to so many countries. We have known how great our game has been for years but now it's time for others to find out."

CANADA Despite trailing behind rugby, Canada has enjoyed a rugby league revival since 2010 thanks to the inclusion of the former NRL star-studded Toronto Wolfpack in the Super League competition BROADCASTER: ROGER SPORTS NET

IRELAND Ireland boasts a World Cup league team still growing in strength, as evidenced by their solid 2017 showing.

BROADCASTER: Fox Sports

FRANCE In much the same way as Canada, French league has made major inroads after the UK Super League's addition of the Catalans Dragons. BROADCASTER: BeIN Sports

USA League has had sporadic outings in the US, including the 1987 State of Origin in Long Beach and the 2018 Rugby League International Challenge between New Zealand and England in Denver. That match drew 19,320 fans but US viewers for tonight's game are expected to eclipse that figure by a long way. BROADCASTER: Fox Sports

UK The UK is currently a league powerhouse with the English Super League, but with the world's second-strongest comp still on hold amid the coronavirus crisis expect a massive spike in Brits tuning in for the NRL relaunch.

BROADCASTER: Skysports

AFRICA To be shown in 48 countries including Angola, Botswana, Congo Democratic Republic, Senegal, South Africa and Swaziland Despite being overshadowed slightly by South Africa's massive rugby union standing, French influence has led to the 13-man game flourishing in Gambia, Morocco, Nigeria and Ghana.

BROADCASTER: Fox Sports

PNG The home of the Kumuls boasts some of the most frenzied footy supporters in the world, with their strengthening national team bolstered by the PNG Hunters' inclusion in the Intrust Super Cup.

BROADCASTER: Digicel/SKY Pacific/ TVWAN - Digicel TV

SAMOA Another growing Pacific powerhouse, Samoa has long boasted a number of NRL and Super League players, such as Bronco Anthony Milford and Eel Junior Paulo, who will both face off against each other in tonight's season relaunch opener.

BROADCASTER: TV3/Sky Pacific

TONGA The tiny Polynesian country is punching well above its weight with a new wave of passionate fans, following the dizzying rise of the star-studded national team, the Mate Ma'a, who have now beaten all top tier countries, including Australia.

BROADCASTER: Digicel/Sky Pacific

FIJI Possibly only behind PNG in terms of passionate supporters, Fiji is also known as nursery for some of the NRL's biggest stars, such as Maika Sivo and Semi Radradra.

BROADCASTER: Fiji Broadcasting Corporation/Sky Pacific NRL also showing in: Cook Islands, Kiribati, Nauru, Niue, American Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, Vanuatu and Micronesia.

NEW ZEALAND Warriors fans may have had little to cheer about in recent years, but league fans across the ditch will still be able to take in the considerable Kiwi talent scattered across the rest of the NRL from tonight.

BROADCASTER: Sky Pacific

INFLIGHT/INSHIP Worldwide - excluding Australia, NZ and Pacific Islands BROADCASTER: Sport 24 STREAMING COVERAGE: Worldwide except for Australia, New Zealand & Pacific Islands
---
China's lethally evasive communist government and its craven official enablers stand exposed by the coronavirus, and need some serious doses of legal justice

What did China know about the likelihood of unleashing a deadly coronavirus pandemic upon the world, and when did China know it?

Answers: a hell of a lot, and a hell of a long time ago.

The first intensely pathogenic human coronavirus, SARS, killed nearly 800 people between 2002 and 2004. A second outbreak, of the terrifyingly named severe acute diarrhoea syndrome coronavirus, or SADS, occurred in 2018 and wiped out 24,000 pigs.

"Both outbreaks began in China," experts from the Wuhan Institute of Virology and the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences concluded, "and were caused by coronaviruses of bat origin." The same experts also warned in March 2019: "It is generally believed that bat-borne CoVs will re-emerge to cause the next disease outbreak. In this regard, China is a likely hotspot.

"The challenge is to predict when and where, so that we can try our best to prevent such outbreaks." Stopping the sale of bats for human consumption might have been a good start. Instead, China's communist leaders did nothing.

Worse still, they sought to conceal the latest coronavirus outbreak. According to some reports, the first coronavirus case emerged on November 17 in Hubei province. Six days after the first Wuhan resident fell ill on December 10, local health officials made the connection between the disease and - surprise! - a bat-selling market in their city.

According to a timeline compiled by US news site Axios, authorities were not told about the new virus until December 27. Despite that alert, government officials still took little or no action - apart from reprimanding doctors who discussed the virus in an online chat room.

Oh, Wuhan also threw a big Lunar New Year banquet on January 18. You know, to give the coronavirus a chance to become acquainted with tens of thousands of people.

The evidence is in. China wilfully mishandled this matter prior to and during the current outbreak. To date, Chinese government inaction has led to the deaths of more than 11,000.

So, what happens next? Well, some may say that arresting Chinese President Xi Jinping and hauling him before a court in his jocks is unrealistically ambitious.

This is not the case. Arresting every single member of the Chinese Communist Party and charging them for decades of tyrannical barbarism - now, that's ambitious.

(In such a scenario, of course, sentence discounts would be permitted for those Chinese officials who so upset ex-PM Kevin Rudd during Copenhagen climate talks in 2010.) Encouragingly, there may be a means of bringing Jinping and other senior communists to justice.

"An argument could be made that just like support for terrorism, which is legally actionable, a government that engages in such reckless disregard and negligence and covers up an epidemic that has the potential to spread worldwide could be held legally liable," Israel-based lawyer Nitsana Darshan-Leitner told Fox News.

"Cover-ups and deliberate acts to conceal a deadly medical crisis are not (among) the protected acts of a sovereign state or of responsible leaders." Speaking of cover-ups, the UN's China-compliant World Health Organisation and its useless leader Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus deserve more than mere media criticism.

"The coronavirus pandemic has shown that Tedros is not fit to lead the WHO," academic Bradley Thayer and Lianchao Han, vice-president of Citizen Power Initiatives for China, wrote in a joint opinion piece.

"Because of his leadership, the world may have missed a critical window to halt the pandemic or mitigate its virulence." As China actively concealed the extent of the outbreak and silenced whistleblowers, Tedros praised Chinese "transparency". On January 14, the WHO repeated China's wild claim that the coronavirus was not contagious between humans.

And Tedros is still cheerleading for China all these weeks later. "For the first time, China has reported no domestic COVID19 cases yesterday," Tedros tweeted on Friday. "This is an amazing achievement, which gives us all reassurance that the coronavirus can be beaten." Anyone who believes anything from the Chinese government - about the coronavirus, climate change, last night's football results or the colour of the sky - is an idiot.

Tedros is an idiot whose China-abetting organisation happens to be substantially funded by Australia, among other nations. We may save some economy-rebuilding cash by ending that arrangement.

China does have other friends. Last week members of the reflexively anti-US media rounded on President Donald Trump after he referred to the "China virus".

"Why do you keep using this?" one reporter asked during a White House briefing last week. "A lot of people say it's racist." "Because it's from China," Trump calmly replied, pointing out later that China had at one point tried to pin responsibility for the origins of the virus on American soldiers.

"That can't happen. It's not gonna happen. Not as long as I'm president," Trump said. "It comes from China."As did the previous coronavirus outbreaks. As, most likely, will future coronavirus outbreaks.
---
AN advertisement that highlights the virtues of being confined to Australia after someone "ate a bat" has been cleared by an official investigation, although some who scrutinised the commercial believed it incited contempt and ridicule of China and Chinese people.

The ad, for outdoor equipment company BCF, also -depicts a caucasian man eating a bat burger.

One complaint highlighted in the new Ad Standards Bureau's community panel report said: "This is ... scientifically -inaccurate but my complaint is ... implied racism against China, even if the depiction is not a Chinese person." BCF told the panel its ad was aimed at encouraging -people to enjoy Australia and stay positive.

"Whilst eating a burger with a bat inside can be interpreted to reference the suspected origin of COVID-19, it is a lighthearted scenario intended to be humorous in nature and in no way references race or ethnicity," BCF said.

A minority of panel members found the ad breached the section of Australian Association of National Advertisers' code of ethics that prohibits discrimination or vilification.

"The minority of the panel noted that there has been an increase in negative community opinion towards China since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, and considered that this advertisement reinforces casual racism directed at Chinese people by implying that they are strange and that their strange habits (eating bats) caused a global pandemic.

"The minority considered that the advertisement does -incite contempt and ridicule towards China and Chinese people and is a breach of the code," the panel report said.

But the majority concluded "that showing a person eating a bat as part of a sandwich is a humorous reference to what was widely believed to be the source of the COVID-19 pandemic - the animal to human transfer of the disease in a wildlife market in China.

"The majority considered that using such a reference was lighthearted and comedic, and was not discriminatory." The panel report said the majority noted that a Chinese person was not used in the -advertisement, but "rather a man wearing a wide brimmed hat and holding a fishing rod - intended to be stereo-typically Australian." A poll of more than 4000 people on The Daily Telegraph website found 86 per cent of respondents considered the complaints to be baseless. BCF declined to comment on the Ad Standards report.
---
Fight Beijing's bullies with Oz wine purchases

IT'S home to some of the most-recognised brand names in Australia, like Penfolds, Lehmann, Jacob's Creek and Tyrell's and is worth $6.3 billion each year.

But now it's up to everyday Aussie revellers to get behind our wine sector with thousands of local producers' livelihoods on the line thanks to a "bullying" Beijing's trade brinkmanship after what has already been a horror period for the beleaguered industry.

Aussie winemakers have battled years of drought, the 2019 Black Summer bushfires and the coronavirus pandemic only to now face Chinese tariffs of up to 200 per cent exacting a chokehold on what is our country's fifth-largest export industry.

The latest attack is a part of the ongoing Australian-Chinese trade war, with the communist nation already imposing 80 per cent tariffs on barley and banning imports from six Australian beef suppliers in the wake of the federal government's international call for an inquiry into the origins of COVID-19.

So wine industry bosses are now urging locals to show their support by celebrating with homegrown wine this festive season instead of more expensive exported products.

The call-to-arms came with Tyrrell's Wines chief executive Bruce Tyrrell slamming China for imposing the crippling new tariffs on producers and acting like "the big bully in the schoolyard".

"There is only one way to fix that and that's to stand up to it," he said. "There are a number of producers out there whose businesses are largely China-based and now their market is gone … (But) we don't need to be afraid of China.

"The current government in China is not 100 per cent secure and there is growing opposition to it.

"It's wonderful for people to support their own people and most of us are doing it naturally. This China situation will prod those who aren't already to also back local suppliers." Australian Grape and Wine chief executive Tony Battaglene said considering the Chinese tariffs, it was crucial that locals helped producers get through the supply that can now not be exported.

"It's been a pretty tough year with the bushfires and smoke and COVID," he said. "Now, with China the big concern is that it impacts about 2400 producers. We need people to try and get through this year's supply as much as possible.

"There is no doubt now that there are political motivations behind this and (China's tactics) are going across the agriculture sector. They are clearly trying to put a lot of pressure on our -producers.

"China is a $1.2 billion market and that is a lot of wine to try and move into other markets.

"We hope everyone gives a case of wine to their friends for Christmas to try and help producers." Peak body Wine Australia said such calls were particularly important given the horror run some producers were only just recovering from.

"Unfortunately, the tariffs come off the back of a year where wineries in some regions have been affected by fires and, more broadly, by the restrictions on cellar doors (imposed by COVID-19 safeguards)," a spokeswoman said.

"The best thing to do this Christmas is buy Australian and, if (people) get the opportunity, please do go out and explore the many brilliant regions and get to know some wineries first-hand." Harkham Wines owner Richard Harkham lost 80 per cent of his produce due to bushfire smoke and hopes locals will step up and support the industry in the face of China's actions.

"As a nation we've endured a lot over the past few years so it's really important that we support each other," he said.

"You have to support your family first. When we sell our wine in Australia, we make a lot more revenue than when we sell overseas due to the added costs involved. This is the time we need to rally together to get through what's happening." Iron Gate Estate director and general manager Gavin Kuo also said support from locals is what can keep -smaller wineries alive in the face of growing international competition.

"We are hoping people will help us survive and we need people to keep drinking local wine. With the bushfires and COVID and people not able to come out to wine country during last year's peak season - we were heavily impacted," he said. "Now if people drink our wine and come down and support us, it will give us a fighting chance to recuperate what we have lost in the last four to five years." Hunter Valley winemaker Geoff Krieger, of Brokenwood Wines, agreed buying local was vital right now.

"Whether it's a bottle of Hunter Valley semillon or Hunter Valley Shiraz or gifting your friends and experience to come and see us, now is the time to eat, drink and experience from your own backyard," he said.

Mudgee local Tristan Clarke said he's looking forward to travelling to wine regions across the country to help support the industry in light of borders opening.

"I'm a big wine drinker and I will 100 per cent continue to drink Australian-grown wine this summer. After the year we've had, there has never been a better time to drink local," he said.

"I plan on visiting Orange very soon and now that state borders have opened up, I'm looking into going down to Victoria's wine regions too." To help back Australian wine producers, The Daily Telegraph is offering readers the delicious. Drink Delivered Australian wines offer to help buy local and support the sector. The offer is a mixed case of all Australian wines, with most of the wines from smaller estate wineries around the country. The case of 12 mixed wines, plus two free Tyrrell's sparkling wines will cost just $139.99. Order now to get your wine by Christmas through www.ddd.wine/6000013
---
FOOTY'S finally back and so are the fans - all 300 million of them watching in loungerooms around the world.

In what will be a watershed moment for rugby league, the NRL's stunning eight-game return over the next four days is set to be watched by a -record global television audience of 300 million sport-starved people in what is expected to be the largest TV ratings for a single round in the sport's 112-year history.

Industry insiders predict around 30 to 40 million people around the world would tune in to each bone-rattling match over the next four days as rugby league becomes the first football code in the -English-speaking world to -return to the playing fields and television.

NRL matches will be shown in more than 70 countries, including the US, France, Britain, Papua New Guinea and Uganda.

At 7.50pm tonight when Brisbane and Parramatta kick off at Suncorp Stadium, rugby league will become just the third major sporting league in the world, along with football's K League in South Korea and Germany's Bundesliga, to resume post COVID-19.

Matches will also be shown in such far-flung countries as Nauru, Angola and The Netherlands.

Some countries have aired NRL games in recent years but matches have already been promoted heavily this week.

The increase in viewership could not be accurately predicted but insiders believe it could be by as much as 40 to 50 per cent.

"There's certainly a unique opportunity to attract new fans to our game globally," said acting NRL CEO Andrew Abdo.

"While it has been the loyalty of our fans here at home that has been driving us to resume the season, we will be one of only a few live sports around the world that will be playing in June and July.

"We know fans are craving live sport so we're excited about the global audience we could attract with the resumption of the competition and the exposure that will bring to our corporate partners.

"We are also expecting a strong take-up of the Watch NRL app which allows fans to stream games live throughout the world. It's a credit to our chairman Peter V'landys and the commission for their unwavering commitment to bring the game back on May 28." NRL officials hope to gain a slice of the massive US sports market during the NFL and NBA's shutdowns and have already seen a spike in media interest A story on forbes.com this week was headlined: "Americans, this is why the NRL should be your new favourite sport".

"Rugby league is the lesser-known but infinitely superior form of rugby, and if you like your sport high-octane, occasionally violent, endlessly authentic and frequently spectacular, then you need to tune in this Thursday for the National Rugby League (NRL)," the story read.

"Rugby league is like watching the NFL, except after every down they immediately have to get up and do it again, with no break, and nobody wears padding." Ratings in coronavirus-hit England are also expected to spike significantly with Super League yet to recommence.

"Around 80 to 90 million people would have access to the games in America and Europe, maybe more," a TV source said. "From that you have to ask yourself how many would watch it.

"Many may not understand the game but they are craving live sport around the world right now.

"Australians are watching the Bundesliga. Why? Because it's the only live sport being shown. I would imagine around 30 to 40 million people would watch each game for longer than 15 minutes. That would be equivalent to watching one quarter of an NFL match.

"Way back in 2011, State of Origin and the NRL grand final reached 40 million households in the US and 48 million through Europe.

"They might not come back when their preferred sport returns but, this weekend, they will be watching." The NRL has jumped back first ahead of the AFL and is the first sport to be played since March 23.

Despite the hype, Nine and Fox are reluctant to predict their NRL ratings in Australia for this round for fear they may fall short.

While fans will tune in, broadcasters will still have a challenge ahead to create the game-day atmosphere without supporters in the stands.

Sydney Roosters coach Trent Robinson said ravenous sports fans around the world would tune into rugby league.

"There has been a lot of work from the NRL to get back on and we want to represent our game well in some clear air space around the world," said Robinson.

"There has been some interest around rugby league from friends who live overseas. It will be good to get our game back on represented the right way. It's great to be back.

"We want to represent rugby league and there's no better game for us than Friday night's match against Souths to restart the season. Former NSW skipper and coach Laurie Daley knows the NRL cannot miss a wonderful opportunity: "This is a great chance to showcase our game to so many countries. We have known how great our game has been for years but now it's time for others to find out."
---
CHINESE Ambassador Cheng Jingye's threat of a consumer boycott of Australia will prove hollow, the wine industry says. But the seafood sector is worried.

As the Morrison government pressed for an international inquiry into the origins of COVID-19, Mr Cheng this week warned that "maybe the ordinary people will say 'Why should we drink Australian wine? Eat Australian beef?'." Wine and Grape Australia head Tony Battaglene said demand was already increasing and there was likely to be no fallout: "I think there is the potential for consumers to be influenced by that type of media, particularly in China. But I don't think it has happened in this instance." The only time he could recall a downturn linked to a political spat was in 2018 when there were accusations of Chinese spying. Australia's wine exports to China are worth $1.3 billion a year.But Seafood Industry Australia chairwoman Veronica Papacosta is concerned: "We think there is a high chance of an impact which we would not like to see." She said the abalone industry would be hit hardest because of its heavy reliance on the China market.
---
IMF LOOKING AT 'MORE DIRE SCENARIOS'

THE Australian share market has suffered its biggest sell-off in six months as it finally yields to fears intensive efforts to contain the coronavirus outbreak are failing.

And the Aussie dollar is plumbing fresh 11-year lows against the greenback, caught in the rip as investors grow increasingly wary about the outlook for the global economy.

In its worst session since August, the benchmark ASX 200 shed 2.3 per cent yesterday, cutting $48.3 billion from the value of companies in the index. It fell heavily at the open - quickly exceeding the 0.7 per cent slide signalled by futures markets - and lost more ground later in the session.

It marked an abrupt change of gear for the market, which had broadly been rising throughout February despite mounting fears authorities were struggling to stop the spread of the virus.

The fall yesterday came after one of the world's leading economic bodies, the International Monetary Fund, warned it would be "prudent" to prepare for a significant fallout from the Covid-19 outbreak. In a statement, IMF managing director Kristalina Georgieva said the outbreak was a global health emergency, had disrupted economic activity and could put a recovery in global growth at risk.

"Above all, this is a human tragedy, but it also has negative economic impact," Ms Georgieva said.

Even if the virus were rapidly contained, growth in China and the rest of the world "would be impacted", she said.

"Of course, we all hope for a V-shaped, rapid recovery - but given the uncertainty, it would be prudent to prepare for more adverse scenarios." Last month, the IMF forecast the global economy would grow 3.3 per cent this year, up from 2.9 per cent last year.

Ms Georgieva said the IMF now expected the outbreak to cut China's rate of growth this year from a projected 6 per cent to 5.6 per cent - in turn cutting about 0.1 percentage points from global growth.

"But we are also looking at more dire scenarios where the spread of the virus continues for longer and more globally, and the growth consequences are more protracted," she said.

In a separate report, Moody's Analytics said efforts by Chinese authorities to curtail the spread were without precedent.

Moody's analysts warned "prolonged factory closures in addition to the closure of major transport linkages are a significant blight on normal manufacturing operations".

"Until the virus is contained and the number of infected patients stops rising, the toll on manufacturers and the broader economy will continue to rise," they said.

In developments at the weekend, South Korean President Moon Jae-in said he was putting his country on its highest alert for infectious diseases, ordering officials to take "unprecedented, powerful" steps to fight an outbreak there.

In Italy, authorities battled to contain Europe's first major outbreak. There were also some virus clusters with no direct links to China, where authorities were struggling to trace the origins.

In Australia, companies including shopping centre owner Vicinity Centres, casino group Crown Resorts and theme park operator Village Roadshow have warned the virus outbreak is taking a toll as tourist numbers slide.

Others to warn of an impact yesterday included BlueScope Steel. Reporting a 70 per cent drop in first-half net profit on the back of weaker steel prices, BlueScope warned the virus outbreak would "heavily impact" its Chinese business.

Earlier in the day, the Aussie dollar hit a fresh 11-year low against the greenback, at US65.85c. It was March 2009, in the thick of the financial crisis, when it last traded at such depths against the US dollar.

peter.taylor@news.com.auwith AP, AAP
---
AN advertisement that highlights the virtues of being confined to Australia after someone "ate a bat" has been cleared by an official investigation, although some who scrutinised the commercial believed it incited contempt and ridicule of China and Chinese people.

The ad, for outdoor equipment company BCF, also -depicts a caucasian man eating a bat burger.

One complaint highlighted in the new Ad Standards Bureau's community panel report said: "This is ... scientifically -inaccurate but my complaint is ... implied racism against China, even if the depiction is not a Chinese person." BCF told the panel its ad was aimed at encouraging -people to enjoy Australia and stay positive.

"Whilst eating a burger with a bat inside can be interpreted to reference the suspected origin of COVID-19, it is a lighthearted scenario intended to be humorous in nature and in no way references race or ethnicity," BCF said.

A minority of panel members found the ad breached the section of Australian Association of National Advertisers' code of ethics that prohibits discrimination or vilification.

"The minority of the panel noted that there has been an increase in negative community opinion towards China since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, and considered that this advertisement reinforces casual racism directed at Chinese people by implying that they are strange and that their strange habits (eating bats) caused a global pandemic.

"The minority considered that the advertisement does -incite contempt and ridicule towards China and Chinese people and is a breach of the code," the panel report said.

But the majority concluded "that showing a person eating a bat as part of a sandwich is a humorous reference to what was widely believed to be the source of the COVID-19 pandemic - the animal to human transfer of the disease in a wildlife market in China.

"The majority considered that using such a reference was lighthearted and comedic, and was not discriminatory." The panel report said the majority noted that a Chinese person was not used in the -advertisement, but "rather a man wearing a wide brimmed hat and holding a fishing rod - intended to be stereo-typically Australian." A poll of more than 4000 people on The Daily Telegraph website found 86 per cent of respondents considered the complaints to be baseless. BCF declined to comment on the Ad Standards report.
---
THE South Sydney Rabbitohs will slowly ease old super coach Wayne Bennett out of -recruitment negotiations.

The seven-time premiership-winning coach enticed Queensland Origin forward Jai Arrow to join the club next season but it will probably be the last deal he does.

Bennett is moving on when his contract expires after next season and there is a long history of players often following him when he switches clubs. Last year centre James Roberts and edge forward Jaydn Su'A came from the Broncos to join him at the Rabbitohs. He also tried to bring budding Brisbane superstar David Fifita to Redfern.

When Bennett left St George Illawarra in 2010 to join the Newcastle Knights, he took Darius Boyd, Alex McKinnon and Adam Cuthbertson. Jeremy Smith came a year later.

From Newcastle back to the Broncos, he took Boyd and Travis Waddell. The Rabbitohs are in negotiations with Blues Origin star Cameron Murray - their future captain. They want him off the market -before he can talk to rivals in November.

His negotiations are being handled by football general manager Mark Ellison, chief executive Blake Solly and Jason Demetriou after the departure of Shane Richardson.

At some stage, assistant coach Demetriou will have to get even more involved because he takes over from Bennett in 2022.

Souths are also keen to lock down teenage sensation Joseph Suaalii, rated by many as the best 16-year-old footballer in the country and a future Greg Inglis.

Laurie's pride and joy for daughter FOOTY legend Laurie Daley says he has had fewer prouder moments in his life. Last week his daughter, Jaimee, graduated from the Goulburn Police Academy a probationary constable.

Daley's family couldn't attend the graduation due of COVID-19 restrictions, but there was no prouder parent in the country.

"Any time your kids achieve something like this, it's very special," Daley said. "She's excited but I'm a bit nervous. She's worked very hard to get there - like all police graduates - and I'm really proud."
---
Elevation should be on merit THE Prime Minister's panic reshuffle is an over-reaction to a perceived problem regarding women in Parliament (Fair go for fairer sex as PM shuffles deck, 30/3).

I am not concerned how many women are ministers in his Government. What I want is the most competent ministry, irrespective of gender, that can take our country forward.

I don't think we have that in this reshuffle and we will suffer for it. Our Prime Minister seems to have lost his way recently and we may suffer for decisions made in haste to satisfy the minority leftist activists who are hellbent on ruining our great country.

The 'silent majority' need to speak up before it's too late. G. Hutton, Saratoga

HOW demeaning it would be if I were to be promoted simply on the basis of gender (Fair go for fairer sex as PM shuffles deck, 30/3).

I want a promotion on the basis of merit; that is qualifications, experience and achievements.

Introducing quotas is discriminatory towards males.

Rita Zammit, Concord

Base load power still the mainstay A VERY interesting article penned by our Opposition leader, Anthony Albanese (A plan to grow jobs and secure Australia's future, 30/3). He stated that Australia could lead the world by exporting lithium batteries to other nations of the world. The problem there is most countries are manufacturing goods by using base load power, such as coal, gas and nuclear. So why would they want our batteries?

Perhaps Mr Albanese can tell us what year or century batteries will be able to store the energy required to produce Australians steel, aluminium and the 1001 other products needed to make manufacturing in Australia more viable. It would be marvellous to build products such as trains in this country but you would need cheap, 24/7 reliable energy, which renewable energy cannot supply.  Then, of course, you have our unions, which would price Australia out of the market to supply such a product. Look what happened to the car industry.

Nice try Albo, but you need to go back to the drawing board. Bruce Rollo, Wollongbar

Where are the markets?

When Labor's Anthony Albanese can define the areas where Australian products have, at least, competitive equality, his latest pipe dream is just that.

Australia suffers from it's lack of volume markets, high wage structure combined with the cost of our tyranny of distance in distribution. I'm sure our manufacturers will be interested in the results of Labor's findings.

John Grundy, Online

What's the catch?

Labor leader Anthony Albanese promises to give manufacturing a good kick along with his proposed National Reconstruction Fund to be worth $15 billion. This should be the long awaited music to our ears. Why hasn't the Government done this already, it doesn't need a Rhodes Scholar to identify the need for such an initiative.

But I have two concerns here: first, how genuine Labor is with this commitment; and second, what will be the union involvement?

Will this be another 'superannuation fund' arrangement where unions dominate the proposed 'independent board'? There has to be a catch somewhere.

John George, Terrigal

Green with energy Congratulations to the NSW Government on their appointment of former PM Malcolm Turnbull to a climate advisory board.

Can anyone think of a better way for Mr Turnbull to signal his environmental credentials and commitment to the cause than by building a row of wind turbine generators on South Head? How many of the woke folk of the eastern suburbs would get that warm and fuzzy feeling with a permanent visual reminder of the death of the evil coal? Or he could festoon Red Hill, just behind Parliament House in Canberra, with wind towers.  Imagine the virtue signal to the rest of the world with our parliament overlooked by a green energy source.

Bruce Collison, Banks, ACT

SES to the rescue Congratulations to former prime minister Tony Abbott for digging in and helping out cleaning up the devastation left by the recent flooding (Tony lends a hand in flood clean-up, 30/3).

It's a shame there aren't a few more ex pollies like you out there lending a hand.

Brian Dorsett. Gorokan

Setting an example Isn't it wonderful to see a former prime minister out in our trouble spots doing what he can for the good of the community. An unheralded Tony Abbott leads some others for dead in the fair dinkum stakes. This community spirited man is what Australia's about, he's what Australia stands for. Past and present politicians should consider taking a leaf out of Tony's book.

Peter Cattlin, Freshwater

Quotas not the way Louise Roberts (Merit must come first, 30/3) is right. The push for more female representation and talk of quotas in Parliament will only lead to token appointments and potentially do more harm than good.

Yes, there should be more women in Parliament. Not just for the sake of diversity but because, shock horror, competence isn't just a bastion of the male genome.

But a bid to get more women elected to Parliament amid a furore over sexual assault and harassment does nothing to eradicate systemic failures and the appalling behaviours of the few bad apples, many of whom being unelected staffers. I think gender-based quotas places constraints and undermines the benefits of bringing a more diverse representation of people including not only gender, but race, age, experience and other.

Dr Jack Dikian, Mosman

Wuhan virus, in a name I'm confused? We were told by the PC brigade that we must not call the Wuhan, Chinese virus by its place of origin but must use the generic term COVID-19. If we did call it the Wuhan virus or Chinese virus we'd be racist.

But it's now OK to label the same virus in all its mutating forms by the place where it mutated and the new strain identified. So we have the UK/British/English strain (the Chinese Communist Party loves calling it that), the South African strain and what's being called "the most dangerous, most lethal strain"... the Brazilian variant.

Why the change in naming policy and who decides what's now OK? I haven't heard complaints from the UK, South African or Brazilian governments.

They accept the truth, the reality of the disease's origins, so why not China, the place that gave the world this insidious disease?

Paul Maher, Canberra

Briefly ...

We learn today that former PM Malcolm Turnbull has been appointed by NSW Cabinet to chair a new climate policy board. How would he get such a gig given his legacy of submarines that will never be built and the albatross that is Snowy 2.0? I'm hoping this is an April Fool's Day joke mistakenly released a few days early.

Rob Jones, Panania

* * * Well Louise Roberts knows what she is talking about (Merit must come first, 30/3). If a woman is up to the job give her a go at it but don't just put them in there to make the numbers look equal. That's what the Labor Party has been pushing for years and if the government pushes that way they could miss out on some very smart men who have run large organisations that can help the country forge ahead. Smart people run governments, not numbers in equality.

Michael, Lithgow

* * * It's probably a good time to remind the Parramatta sport scientist that Scott Morrison has a lot more fans than the Eels will ever have, and that sport and politics should always be separate (PM cops an eely stare, 29/3).

Jack Jackson, Burleigh Heads

HAVE YOUR SAYMAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
Sydney's Chinese Consulate has lately sent a series of angry emails to The Daily Telegraph, demanding various apologies and retractions. Little did they know …

In a daring counterespionage manoeuvre, covert Daily Telegraph operatives recently installed an array of secret microphones and cameras throughout Sydney's Chinese Consulate.

These devices, cunningly hidden inside Aldi shopping bags, have enabled The Daily Telegraph to build a comprehensive and totally imaginary picture of activities and events within the Consulate's heavily-guarded walls.

Many of those activities and events, as it turns out, directly involve this very newspaper. Please commit these top-secret revelations to memory and eat this document immediately afterwards.

April 2. Surveillance zone: the Chief of Official Truth's disinformation dissemination office. He has summoned an underling.

Chief: "Underling 215, have you completed the official Chinese government document that will crush the insolent Daily Telegraph and forever establish the innocence of the People's Republic over this whole COVID-19 nonsense?" 215: "Yes, sir!" (Hands document to the Chief.) Chief: "Let's see … 'origin of the virus undetermined' … 'effectiveness of China's epidemic prevention' … 'Daily Telegraph's ignorance, prejudice and arrogance' …. Very good. Email this to them at once." 215: "Yes, sir!" Chief: "And for God's sake, put some pants on." April 4. The Chief of Official Truth's office. Underling 215 is briefing the Chief on The Daily Telegraph's response.

215: "It is with regret that I inform you they have mocked us, sir." Chief: "Mocked?" 215: "Yes, sir. They have taken our heartfelt and entirely honest proof of COVID decency and turned it into a litany of alleged communist wrongdoings, sir." Chief: "This won't do at all! Draft another email, this time with … wait a minute. Wait just one minute. Are you wearing daisies in your hair?" 215: "Just trying to blend in with decadent Australian perverts, sir. For infiltration purposes." Chief: (long pause) "I suppose that's one way of putting it. Send another email - and make it irrefutable! Demand that it be published! The Daily Telegraph must be corrected!" April 15. A visibly tense Underling 215 prepares to tell the Chief about The Daily Telegraph's latest reaction to furious Consulate condemnation.

215: "I have good news, sir, and bad news." Chief: "Silence! I'm listening to Ray on GB." (Removes headphones, chuckling.) "My, I sure wouldn't want to be Malcolm Turnbull this morning. Heh! Now, what's this about good news?" 215: "The Daily Telegraph, sir. They have published our email, the one where we forcefully explain how the Wu … I mean, the American armed forces virus truly-ruly didn't come from China." Chief: "Excellent! And the bad news?" 215: "They, er, they did this to it." (Hands the paper to the Chief, showing how The Daily Telegraph used communist-style redactions to reverse its intended message.) Chief: "This is an outrage! This is the ultimate insult!" (Pauses, strokes chin.) "Still, it's quite an impressive job. Takes me back to the days when I was opinion censor at the People's Daily. My brother was the sports censor. And the guy who became head of the Hubei Province Doctor Disappearance Squad censored the horoscopes." 215: "Who was the editor, sir?" Chief: "We didn't have one. Just censors." (Strokes chin, gazes into middle distance.) "Good times." April 22. Surveillance zone: the Consulate's Great Hall. All staff are present for an emergency meeting.

Chief: "This time they have gone too far. This time they have completely … Underling 215! Stop stroking chin! Stop it!" Chin: "Thank you, sir." Chief: (gravely) "The Daily Telegraph has added coronavirus drawings to China's national emblem." 215: "But sir! The national emblem of China is the symbol of the People's Republic of China and is inviolable!" Chief: "Yes. And I want you to make exactly that point in … our next blistering email!" Chin: "Another email, sir?" Chief: (sighs) "I know. What's the point of being senior communist officials if we can't even shoot anybody? Anyway, command them to provide a public apology. Let's see how they like them apples." 215: "That reminds me, sir. Your package of Hubei-style apple sauce has arrived. Fresh from the Wuhan market." Entire room: "WUHAN?!" (Staff flee the Great Hall, upturning chairs and shoving each other aside as they rush for the exits.) April 23. A distressed and sobbing Underling 215 stands before the Chief of Official Truth.

Chief: "Get over it, 215. Chin's fatal trampling was a whole day ago." 215: "It's not that, sir. It's this." (Hands the Chief a copy of The Daily Telegraph). "They've called my email a … a … a … they've called it a 'pansygram', sir." Chief: "Hmmm. So they have. And they say here they're expecting another email 'from the Consulate's obedient tutu boys'." 215: "I'm a girl, sir!" (Runs from the office in tears.)Chief: (To himself) "Well, at least we know it's not just my office with a hidden camera in it."
---
PARRAMATTA EELS V BRISBANE BRONCOS 7.50PM TONIGHT

FOOTY'S finally back and so are the fans - all 300 million of them watching in loungerooms around the world.

In what will be a watershed moment for rugby league, the NRL's stunning eight-game return over the next four days is set to be watched by a -record global TV audience of 300 million sport-starved people- in what is expected to be the largest TV ratings for a single round in the sport's 112-year history.

Industry insiders predict about 30 to 40 million people around the world would tune in to each bone-rattling match over the next four days as rugby league becomes the first football code in the -English-speaking world to -return to the playing fields and TV.

NRL matches will be shown in more than 70 countries, including the US, France, Britain, Papua New Guinea and Uganda.

At 7.50pm tonight when Brisbane and Parramatta kick off at Suncorp Stadium, rugby league will become just the third major sporting league in the world, along with football's K League in South Korea and Germany's Bundesliga, to resume post COVID-19.

Matches will also be shown in such far-flung countries as Nauru, Angola and The Netherlands-. Some countries have aired NRL games in recent years but matches have already been promoted heavily this week.

'UNIQUE OPPORTUNITY' The increase in viewership could not be accurately predicted but insiders believe it could be by as much as 40 to 50 per cent.

"There's certainly a unique opportunity to attract new fans to our game globally," acting NRL CEO Andrew Abdo said.

"While it has been the loyalty- of our fans here at home that has been driving us to resume the season, we will be one of only a few live sports around the world that will be playing in June and July.

"We know fans are craving live sport so we're excited about the global audience we could attract with the resumption of the competition and the exposure that will bring to our corporate partners.

"We are also expecting a strong take-up of the Watch NRL app which allows fans to stream games live throughout the world. It's a credit to our chairman Peter V'landys and the commission for their unwavering commitment to bring the game back on May 28." NRL officials hope to gain a slice of the massive US sports market during the NFL and NBA's shutdowns and have already seen a spike in media interest. An article on forbes.com this week was headlined: "Americans, this is why the NRL should be your new favourite sport." "Rugby league is the lesser-known but infinitely superior form of rugby and, if you like your sport high-octane, occasionally- violent, endlessly authentic and frequently spectacular, then you need to tune in this Thursday for National- Rugby League," it read.

"Rugby league is like watching the NFL, except after every down they immediately have to get up and do it again, with no break, and nobody wears padding."

A SIGNIFICANT SPIKE Ratings in coronavirus-hit England are also expected to spike significantly with Super League yet to recommence.

"About 80 to 90 million people would have access to the games in America and Europe-, maybe more," a TV source said. "From that you have to ask yourself how many would watch it.

"Many may not understand the game but they are craving live sport around the world right now.

"Australians are watching the Bundesliga. Why? Because it's the only live sport being shown. I would imagine about 30 to 40 million people would watch each game for longer than 15 minutes.

"That would be equivalent to watching one quarter of an NFL match. "Way back in 2011, State of Origin and the NRL grand final reached 40 million households in the US and 48 million through Europe.

"They might not come back when their preferred sport returns but, this weekend, they will be watching." The NRL has jumped back first ahead of the AFL and is the first sport to be played since March 23.

Despite the hype, Nine and Fox are reluctant to predict their NRL ratings in Australia for this round for fear they may fall short.

While fans will tune in, broadcasters will still have a challenge ahead to create the game-day atmosphere without supporters in the stands.

'GREAT TO BE BACK' Sydney Roosters coach Trent Robinson said ravenous sports fans around the world would tune into rugby league.

"There has been a lot of work from the NRL to get back on and we want to represent- our game well in some clear air space around the world," said Robinson.

"There has been some interest around rugby league from friends who live overseas. It will be good to get our game back on represented the right way. It's great to be back.

"We want to represent rugby league and there's no better game for us than Friday night's match against Souths to restart the season." Former NSW skipper and coach Laurie Daley knows the NRL cannot miss a wonderful opportunity: "This is a great chance to showcase our game to so many countries. We have known how great our game has been for years but now it's time for others to find out."

LEAGUE OF NATIONS CANADA Despite trailing behind rugby, Canada has enjoyed a rugby league revival since 2010 thanks to the inclusion of the former NRL star-studded Toronto Wolfpack in the Super League competition BROADCASTER: ROGER SPORTS NET

IRELAND Ireland boasts a World Cup league team still growing in strength, as evidenced by their solid 2017 showing.

BROADCASTER: Fox Sports

FRANCE In much the same way as Canada, French league has made major inroads after the UK Super League's addition of the Catalans Dragons.

BROADCASTER: BeIN Sports

USA League has had sporadic outings in the US, including the 1987 State of Origin in Long Beach and the 2018 Rugby League International Challenge between New Zealand and England in Denver. That match drew 19,320 fans but US viewers for tonight's game are expected to eclipse that figure by a long way. BROADCASTER: Fox Sports

UK The UK is currently a league powerhouse with the English Super League, but with the world's second-strongest comp still on hold amid the coronavirus crisis expect a massive spike in Brits tuning in for the NRL relaunch.

BROADCASTER: Skysports

AFRICA To be shown in 48 countries including Angola, Botswana, Congo Democratic Republic, Senegal, South Africa and Swaziland Despite being overshadowed slightly by South Africa's massive rugby union standing, French influence has led to the 13-man game flourishing in Gambia, Morocco, Nigeria and Ghana. BROADCASTER: Fox Sports

PNG The home of the Kumuls boasts some of the most frenzied footy supporters in the world, with their strengthening national team bolstered by the PNG Hunters' inclusion in the Intrust Super Cup.

BROADCASTER: Digicel/SKY Pacific/ TVWAN - Digicel TV

SAMOA Another growing Pacific powerhouse, Samoa has long boasted a number of NRL and Super League players, such as Bronco Anthony Milford and Eel Junior Paulo, who will both face off against each other in tonight's season relaunch opener.

BROADCASTER: TV3/Sky Pacific

TONGA The tiny Polynesian country is punching well above its weight with a new wave of passionate fans, following the dizzying rise of the star-studded national team, the Mate Ma'a, who have now beaten all top tier countries, including Australia.

BROADCASTER: Digicel/Sky Pacific

FIJI Possibly only behind PNG in terms of passionate supporters, Fiji is also known as nursery for some of the NRL's biggest stars, such as Maika Sivo and Semi Radradra.

BROADCASTER: Fiji Broadcasting Corporation/Sky Pacific NRL also showing in: Cook Islands, Kiribati, Nauru, Niue, American Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, Vanuatu and Micronesia.

NEW ZEALAND Warriors fans may have had little to cheer about in recent years, but league fans across the ditch will still be able to take in the considerable Kiwi talent scattered across the rest of the NRL from tonight.

BROADCASTER: Sky Pacific

INFLIGHT/INSHIP Worldwide - excluding Australia, NZ and Pacific Islands BROADCASTER: Sport 24
---
1 LATRELL MITCHELL Cast your mind back to May last year at the SCG. The Roosters flogged Wests Tigers 42-12. Mitchell (above) scored a hattrick of tries, set up two others and kicked seven goals. It was one of those perfect-10 performances, the ones only champions produce every two or three years. Latrell, for all his issues, is the game's biggest star. I cannot wait to see him run out for the Rabbitohs against his old club on Friday night.

2 THE FULLBACKS We might have lost Kangaroos greats Billy Slater and Greg Inglis in recent years but what about this lot? James Tedesco, Kalyn Ponga, Roger Tuivasa-Sheck, Tom "Turbo" Trbojevic, Ryan Papenhuyzen, Mitchell, Valentine Holmes and Charnze Nicoll-Klokstad. You can throw in Clint Gutherson, too, and Dallin Watene-Zelezniak. I defy anyone to recall any era with so much talent and so much excitement across the competition in the No. 1 jersey. Each and every one of them can turn a game in a flash.

3 CRAIG BELLAMY There's nothing quite like watching Melbourne Storm's supercoach going ballistic in the coaching box. It's the best theatre in the competition. A coach who rides every play and every tackle with the most extraordinary passion and desperation. Then you bump into him at a function and he is completely normal, calm and even laid-back. The Storm have got two huge games to restart the competition - against 2019 grand finalists the Raiders and then the Rabbitohs.

4 JUNE-JULY WITH NO ORIGIN This is such great news for the integrity of the competition. There's nothing worse than watching good teams bomb out of premiership contention around August because they've had to give up their NSW Blues and Queensland Maroons players for six weeks.

Watch the Sydney Roosters recover from their two losses now that champion fullback James Tedesco and skipper Boyd Cordner will be on deck every week. The standard of footy without 34 of the best players also falls away.

5 GUS AND SOCIAL MEDIA We're framing a market on the inevitable closure of Phil Gould's Twitter account. Grand final day is paying $66. Round eight is a $1.08 favourite, a time of year when frustrated fans traditionally start harassing the great man about his pre-season predictions, five-year plans, the abysmal mess he left behind at the Panthers etc, etc, etc. Gus however, has had more comebacks than Johnny Farnham and will be back again in 2021, hopefully unblocking your columnist.

6 WAYNE BENNETT'S FUTURE I wrote earlier in the year that "WAYNE'S PAIN" would be a backpage headline in the Tele by August. There will be so much debate and drama over the seven-time premiership-winning coach, with genuine questions about him keeping up with the modern game at 70 years of age. Bennett is under contract until the end of 2021, when assistant Jason Demetriou steps in as the Rabbitohs' head coach. But the rumour that he's returning to the Dragons next year just won't go away.

7"DAVID FIFITA The most exciting young forward in the competition since Sonny Bill Williams is off contract at the end of this season. This 113kg youngster has got the lot … the most awesome power and strength, incredible speed for a man of his size and he can step like Benji Marshall in his heyday.

He's already scored a magnificent tearaway try this year, against the North Queensland Cowboys (right), running 70m and leaving Valentine Holmes clutching at thin air.

8 REFEREE RAGE Fast forward to Thursday night, 10pm. Full-time, Broncos v Parramatta. The press conferences. What price the losing coach, Brad Arthur or Anthony Seibold, blames the one referee, the captain's challenge, the Bunker, the touch judges or new rulings around the ruck?

Considering the backlash when ARLC chairman Peter V'landys overruled just about everyone in the game to implement his changes, it will be happening all weekend.

9 ROOSTERS THREE-PEAT Can this championship outfit recover from twostraight losses in a shortened season to become the first team since Jack Gibson's Parramatta Eels (1981-83) to win threestraight titles? It's going to be a tough return to footy with matches against arch rivals the Rabbitohs and the Brisbane Broncos in the first two rounds. So much pressure will be on young halfback Kyle Flanagan, who is replacing the one and only Cooper Cronk, playing behind big boppers Jared Waerea-Hargreaves and Sio Siua Taukeiaho.

10 RADIO RATINGS It's a whole new ball game with the retirement of 2GB's The Continuous Call Team legends Ray Hadley and Bob Fulton. It's OK to say, "Don't touch the sets, don't touch dial, don't go anywhere", but you simply cannot replace a rugby league Immortal and old Hadley's 33 years of broadcasting. The ABC has been weakened, too, with the inexplicable decision to take the great Craig "Hammo" Hamilton off the team. This is the big opportunity for Triple M to rule the airwaves with "Gordie", "Kenty" and Dan Ginnane, who is now the best radio caller in the business.

11 THE WARRIORS Everyone's second-favourite team because the players, coaching staff and officials so unselfishly left their families and loved ones at home in New Zealand to ensure the NRL could start again on Thursday night.

Their non-appearance could have put in jeopardy the television deal with Channel 9 and Fox Sports.

On paper and on form from the opening two rounds, they could struggle. However, they'll be a tight outfit from living, eating and training together for weeks.

12 THE GREEN MACHINE Best side in the competition to watch because of their spectacular style of attacking football. But can they handle the pressure of expectation? That's the story. They are the favourites for the first time since the TAB started betting on rugby league. Coach Ricky Stuart (right) will get no better opportunity to win his first premiership since back in 2002 at the Sydney Roosters. This is a magnificent "Green Machine" outfit with a classy new halfback, George Williams (left), who looks to have settled in well.

13 CAMERON SMITH'S FAREWELL This will be one of the biggest and most special moments in rugby league history. The champion hooker and Immortal-in-waiting (below) has played 413 games over 19 remarkable seasons.

No interchange, no hiding on the edges and, judging by his performances in the opening two rounds, still a wonderful footballer and game manager.

No more diamond rings but deserves a memorable send-off as we salute an all-time great.

14 THE KNIGHTS Had a great start to the year under new coach Adam O'Brien but will have to battle on without the most parochial fan base in the competition. This is a side that is potentially top-four material.

Four State of Origin players in all the key positions - Dave Klemmer and Daniel Saifiti in the front row, halfback Mitchell Pearce and fullback Kalyn Ponga. At times they looked a genuine threat last year but lacked discipline as old coach Nathan Brown lost the dressingroom.

15 VALENTINE HOLMES As sad as it is to accept "Val" is no longer wearing the black, white and blue of the Cronulla Sharks, there's no doubt the Maroons and Kangaroos superstar (left) will light up the premiership.

In fact, he's one of a few players who will have benefited from COVID-19 and the extra time to get his body readjusted after a stint in the NFL. He will no doubt turn what has been a sluggish Cowboys backline into a slicker and far more dangerous unit.

16 PARRAMATTA EELS Is this finally their year? Brad Arthur lifted the blue and golds from the wooden spoon into fifth position last year. There is nothing - and I mean nothing - more exciting than watching this side in full flight at Bankwest Stadium. The wow factor of Sivo, Gutherson, Ferguson, Jennings and Blake. Mitchell Moses (right with Dylan Brown) has matured into a marquee playmaker, the type of halfback every team needs to win a title. Parramatta fans have gone 34 years since their last one.

17 "PRESSURE Poor old Dean Pay and "Mary" McGregor need wins - and they need them desperately. The debate about their futures will fill more newspaper space than any other issue as the season progresses. Both need to make the eight and play finals football to be assured of keeping their jobs. There will also be pressure on Stephen Kearney at the Warriors. This club has made the finals once in nine years and finished 13th last season. The fact the side is on the road all year could buy Kearney more time.

18 NEXT GENERATION Where do we start? Kotoni Staggs and Xavier Coates at the Brisbane Broncos. Dylan Brown at the Eels or Bronson Xerri at the Cronulla Sharks. A couple of outstanding youngsters at the Penrith Panthers - Matt Burton and the electrifying Stephen Crichton (left). Even Patrick Carrigan at the Broncos. A captain at just 22 in his second season. There are so many youngsters across the 16 clubs who are ready to become establishedstars.

19 RAY WARREN Probably the great man's last year behind the microphone. Imagine the emotion around his final call, probably in State of Origin in November. It would be even worth putting up with "Gus" for 80 minutes to hear one last call. No doubt the NRL will do something special to acknowledge the Hall of Fame broadcasting legend and our voice of league's magnificent contribution over four decades.

20 AFTERNOON GRAND FINAL C'mon Channel 9, give us one more 3pm kick-off like the good old days back at the SCG. A backyard barbecue and a party around the television. This year the grand final is scheduled for October 25. For the first time in years, it's not a long weekend. We're back to work and school the next morning.

In a recent poll, only 10 per cent of fans favoured a night-time kick-off. The NRL agrees and wants an afternoon decider, but it will be Nine's decision. Buzz Rothfield: 20 reasons why I'm excited
---
Scourge of narcotics is user-driven Kyle Sandilands' girlfriend escapes punishment for slapping a policewoman while high on cocaine (Cop slap sparked by crisis, 15/4). What does it take for our courts to get serious?

Drugs are a scourge on our society, and almost daily we hear of big police busts happening.

It takes two to tango; without buyers there'd be no sellers. Drug suppliers are driven by those who are willing to part with good money for this rubbish.

This will continue until our courts toughen up on both suppliers and consumers. If not, why not just legalise illicit drugs and then authorities would have control and could tax these substances, freeing up police to go after more serious crime?

Jim, Sylvania

PM right to go into bat against pro-China WHO So, the World Health Organisation is giving its blessings for China to -reopen wet markets (PM blasts WHO over reopening of markets, 15/4).

Talk about a batty organisation. It is obvious all they are interested in is China.

Scientists believe live bats gave us coronavirus through a third-party animal. Both bats and third-party animals are sold live at wet markets. Yet the WHO is allowing these markets to continue on the basis that their closure would hurt the livelihood of the Chinese and impact their food security.

In February the WHO also said nations closing borders to China would do "more harm than good". Given that and the WHO's latest blessing it is obvious all they care about is 'harm' to China. They don't really care about the rest of the world. No wonder Prime Minister Scott Morrison has blasted their decision as "unfathomable".

I am no fan of US President Donald Trump, but given the apparent warmth the WHO has with China, it's no wonder the US is cutting funds to it.

The WHO wants unity and needs funding from all nations. It should therefore, consider the effect coronavirus has had on all nations and not just favour China.

Taro Munn, Watanobbi

Wet market visa bans It seems the WHO is reluctant to insist on the closure of so-called wet markets in Asia.

Given many of the diseases we are now battling apparently originate in markets like these, it would make sense when the restrictions are eased, to permanently ban all visitors to and from countries that refuse to close such markets down.

If most of the major countries around the world enforced this, I'm betting it would be a lot more effective than anything the WHO might do or not do.

Peter Thorpe, Randwick

Ensuring school safety PM Scott Morrison's call to send the kids back to school may be based on the advice of his advisers but it shouldn't go ahead without a radical implementation of basic preventive action, like that in Singapore (Back to school plea to teachers, 15/4).

All teachers should be equipped with no-touch thermometers to screen out those most at risk and this should happen twice a day.

Schools must be able to provide adequate handwashing facilities and soap in single-touch containers.

Gel sanitiser and wipes must be available in each classroom. All classroom surfaces need to be cleaned twice daily with chlorine dioxide, the steriliser proven to be active against coronavirus and used in Wuhan and airports across Asia.

Any case of infection should necessitate school closure and "fogging" with the same chlorine dioxide.

We must protect our teachers and childcare workers as well as children and their families.

Dr Colin Hughes, Midland DC, WA

Unwanted anti-vax advice With the world eagerly awaiting the discovery of a vaccine to fight COVID-19, why would anyone take the word of people whose only claim to fame is acting and surfing (Loco Lucas spreading anti-vax nonsense, 15/4).

When some of the best medical and scientific minds are feverishly researching and trialling a cure which could take many months to pass stringent protocols, what makes these people think their anti-vaccination opinion is valid.

It's the same with the person with a lamp which is purported to cure this illness.

Please don't wade into areas where you probably have no medical knowledge or background, don't stand in the way with unproven theories. There will always be naysayers but now is not the time for this message.

Maybe they should read another article in Wednesday's Telegraph about how artist Pink and her young son Jameson have suffered after contracting coronavirus (Virus-stricken star extremely sick, 15/4).

Marg Swindells, Castle Hill

Show Nine the door The NRL should say to Channel 9: There's the door don't let it hit you on the way out (Nine's NRL wipeout, 15/4).

There are more options to televise without them and, who knows, we might even get back 7pm starts to State of Origin games and 4pm Sunday afternoon grand finals.

Peter Wilcox, Blayney

When justice system fails Cardinal George Pell's wrongful conviction for serious crimes against children and his subsequent exoneration by our highest court, raises serious questions about our entire judicial system (Cardinal: My life in jail's Unit 8, 15/4).

Since his release Pell has remarked in interviews that one of his former inmates, he believes, has been wrongly convicted of murder. Pell, as an experienced and extremely well educated priest would not, I suggest, have formed this opinion lightly.

Pell had the financial backing to pursue his innocence all the way to the High Court but many others who claim their innocence do not enjoy such support.

This means they can be locked away for 10, 20, 30 years even though they are innocent.

How do we right such wrongs; what if Pell's former 'cell mate' is innocent; how many others are there in this space?

This is serious and needs to be addressed. Let us not forget Victoria's Lawyer X!

John George, Terrigal,

Briefly … As well as the Ruby Princess, we should be looking at the way we allowed plane passengers to arrive with little screening or checks for many weeks into the pandemic (It's double trouble for Ruby liner, 15/4). Must be changes for the future.

M Long, Lake Haven "" " Kudos to Scott Morrison and his tireless team working beside him. The "quiet Australians" appreciate all the hard work and long hours being put in to help us through this crisis. Go Team Australia.

Janice Russell, Malua Bay "" " Donald Trump cutting off cash to the shambolic, left-leaning World Health Organisation will scare the living daylights out of this mob (Trump cuts WHO funding - Online, 15/4).

David Ingram, Randwick "" " They say we follow whatever America does. Well, they have just stopped funding the WHO - let's hope the UN is next. I have no problem with following (Trump cuts WHO funding - Online, 15/4).

Herbert Montaine, Tugun Qld "" " Well XXXXX done, Tim Blair (Caught in the redact 15/4)! Give XXXXX Beijing some of its own XXXXX medicine. See how they XXXXX like it.

Tony XXXXX, XXXXX Coast "" " Five months to investigate how/why the Ruby Princess was allowed to dock in Sydney (It's double trouble for Ruby liner, 15/4). Five months! Unbelievable. Who is leading the investigation, Inspector Clouseau?

Geoff, NSW "" " Commonsense should be used when thinking of reopening schools (Back to school plea to teachers, 15/4). Kids and teachers at school can and will make matters worse. Best to wait for the all clear before relaxing any restrictions.

Ted, Bankstown

HAVE YOUR SAYMAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily TelegraphGPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
Manners were better but the horrors were worse when the Spanish flu ripped through Australia, writes David Mills

Walt Disney and Greta Garbo both caught it. Donald Trump's grandfather Frederick Trump died from it. The Spanish flu outbreak of 1918-1919 killed somewhere between 50 and 100 million people across the globe, dwarfing the death toll from the "Great War" it sprang from, and transforming an already shell-shocked world in ways that few saw coming.

Such was the impact of the virus, average life expectancy in the US dropped by an entire decade because of it, says Melbourne-based historian Mary Sheehan, who is researching a PhD thesis on the outbreak. Unlike COVID-19, Spanish flu had the most deadly effect on adults in their prime, mainly those between the ages of 20 and 40. The first reported cases were soldiers on the Western Front in April 2018.

The Australia hit by Spanish flu in January 1919 was a radically different place to the nation we know today. Antibiotics were yet to be developed. There was no internet pumping out minute-by-minute news headlines; no social media to stir fears. International travel was by ship. The (all male) federal parliament sat in Melbourne.

The country was not spared. Some 15,000 people are estimated to have died from what they mainly referred to at the time as "pneumonic influenza", although the exact number is far from certain. Many deaths would have been ascribed to other causes such as heart failure. The death toll in some Aboriginal communities was reportedly as high as 50 per cent.

And yet: Australia did not cop it as bad as some.

Dr Peter Hobbins, Adjunct Fellow in History at the University of Sydney, says the disease tore a swath through New Zealand, killing an estimated 2 per cent of the population, whereas the death rate in Australia was about half of one per cent.

Stopped at the border The difference between the two countries was in their approach to quarantine. Tight controls in Australia delayed the virus coming ashore and made a huge difference to the scale and severity of the eventual epidemic.

"By October 1918, when the first ships carrying cases of pneumonic influenza arrived in Australian quarantine stations, we were very aware of how dangerous it was, and we had a very rigid quarantine system to keep those ships under observation until everybody on board was all clear," Dr Hobbins says.

Warnings poured in from around the world, especially from the US and South Africa, where port cities like Philadelphia and Cape Town suffered massive fatalities.

"We were well aware of what was going on around the world, both through the media and also through military medical channels and high-level government channels, which were sending reports of infected Australian soldiers and nurses, but also how it was affecting other armies and populations around the world," says Dr Hobbins.

The messages coming from across the Tasman proved to be especially crucial. "(New Zealand) sent a lot of urgent messages across, saying once it gets in, you won't be able to control it; be prepared; get all your measures in place," Dr Hobbins says.

Quarantine was eventually breached in January 1919 - probably because somebody deliberately circumvented it, says Dr Hobbins.

The measures put in place to deal with the crisis were drastic, although they varied from state to state. Schools did not open until March. Theatres, sporting fixtures and even libraries were shut down and mass events such as Brisbane's "Ekka" were cancelled.

In NSW, the wearing of masks in public was mandated, with a government decree stating that those who refused to wear facial coverings were "showing their indifference … for the lives of others".

In Victoria, pubs were closed, only to be reopened, after mass protests, on the proviso that they had no more than 20 people inside.

The impact on workplaces was immense. Dr Hobbins says a survey of several hundred companies in NSW at the end of 1919 revealed about 36 per cent of employees had needed to take time off work for influenza that year.

In Melbourne, says Mary Sheehan, "the police were seriously affected [by absences], and many people were taking advantage of the lesser police presence".

Quarantine stations were established throughout the country, with a major camp near Adelaide University reportedly having a markedly convivial, picnic atmosphere.

But for those who got sick, treatment was grim. Little could be done for them except good nursing care and keeping them hydrated to avert fever.

Health authorities in Melbourne made a critical early mistake in shutting 15 makeshift community hospitals in March 1919, believing that the virus was petering out, Ms Sheehan says.

"There were three waves of the virus in Melbourne. The first, which was a little bit milder, started in January but it began to peter out in March.

"The government thought it was all over. They closed a lot of the emergency hospitals and no longer required mandatory reporting of cases, but then it really ramped up again in April, and that really tested the whole health system," she says.

"There were also limited numbers of doctors and nurses because many were still overseas, so there were huge challenges."

States of origin Differences in approach eventually led the states to shut their borders for the first time since Federation.

"In November 1918 the Commonwealth and the states agreed that they wouldn't close the borders, and that the Commonwealth would have responsibility for all quarantine decisions," says Dr Hobbins.

"Unfortunately that agreement didn't last long. By mid-January in 1919 there were cases in Victoria but they weren't definitively diagnosed as pneumonic influenza, because of course normal flu was still doing the rounds as well.

"So Victoria didn't announce that they were infected, but several cases travelled from Melbourne to Sydney … and so in response NSW closed the border with Victoria and broke the agreement with the Commonwealth." The crisis may have breathed new life into old suspicions between the states, but it seems most ordinary Australians resisted the temptation to break bad.

Ms Sheehan says while there were some reports of disturbances at inoculation sites, where people rushed to get to the front of the line, most people were well-behaved and there were many examples of community-mindedness on show.

"There was incredible spirit," she says. "These groups had formed during the war, so you had women's groups who would provide food for their local emergency hospital. People would put 'SOS' signs in their front door if they needed help, and women would go in and nurse them and clean and wash. It was really very impressive." And there was no panic buying of grocery staples, she adds.

"People didn't have the money or resources to panic buy; I haven't come across any evidence of that," she says. "People were living hand to mouth, many of them, particularly after the privations of the war.

"They had stopped wage increases, but that didn't stop price increases on goods, so that made it even harder for people to stockpile." The Spanish flu crisis has been underrated for the role it played in helping shape Australia's national character, Dr Hobbins believes.

"The community had spent four years fighting this foreign war, and then in the fifth year, in 1919, the fighting was over but there was a new war, except it was on Australian soil and it was the same sorts of people who pulled together yet again to provide welfare and community support," he says."Many talk about how Australia was born in the First World War … but I think that the way local communities, families, church groups, voluntary organisations and local councils pulled together in 1919 in the face of this overwhelming crisis, also confirmed a newer sense of national community, and that went right down to the levels of individual neighbourhoods."
---
Time to act on busted NRL bunker Once again the NRL bunker is broken and has caused another team to lose a match (Gould diggers, 27/7).

The fact that they don't seem to be able to get the "hard" decisions right is of concern to clubs, and more importantly fans, despite having a plethora of video and technical equipment and of course their supposed expertise.

NRL head of football Graham Annesley must be sick of making lame excuses for the poor performance of the bunker and perhaps appointing Phil Gould as a Mr Fix-it may prove a remedy.

However, perhaps Annesley should pass the bunker role to Fox Sport or Channel 9 commentators. They invariably get it right, certainly more times than the bunker does, and the savings would easily pay the way for Mr Gould.

Peter Cattlin, Freshwater "" " Having watched five NRL games last weekend, I am even more convinced that bunkers should only be on golf courses and even there they should be avoided!

Paul Wood, Nambucca Heads

Criminals haven't earned special COVID rights For the two women complaining about not being able to have face- to-face visits with their imprisoned husband and boyfriend and want the government to cut them some slack, ask yourselves did your partners cut the victims of their criminal behaviour any slack (WAGS say no contact rule is just criminal, 27/7).

No they didn't, so why should they be treated any different to how they acted. They are criminals and are where they belong.

No visitors should be allowed in prisons while this pandemic is going on. Be thankful you get to see them on video chat.

Some victims of crime never get to see their loved ones because that right was taken away from them by criminal acts.

So think yourselves fortunate you get to talk to your partners as others may not be so lucky due to no fault of their own.

Narelle, Sydney

This cop is certainly tops My "yea for the day" goes to Senior Sergeant Greg Donaldson (Caring cop's stand on seats, 27/7).

Going beyond the 'call of duty' in his initiative to install cars seats instead of issuing fines to struggling families is to be commended.

As an ex-copper's' wife (and grandmother), I would be happy to contribute $350 towards a family in need, to keep a child safe (and save a life).

Thank you Greg, for keeping the next generation safe through your dedicated work.

The saying "cops are tops", certainly rings true here.

Gloria Velleley, Belrose

Beware rising bully China has become the world's number one bully as it continues to do whatever it likes and threatens anyone who questions what they are doing (China's export threat, 27/7).

You only have to look at the countries around the world that have naively accepted money from them, not realising the influence the Chinese government now has over them.

You only have to look at the ports they have built in these countries. This, along with their occupation of islands in the South China Sea is part of their long-term plan to be a world superpower.

You only have to look at the military expansion by China. You don't continue expanding this capacity unless you have some plan to it.

As the rest of the world continues to deal with the pandemic, economies being brought to their knees, protest marches and surviving day to day, China seems to be doing whatever it likes. The trouble is, when we all wake up it will be too late.

Joe Kovac, Prestons

Scrapped tax a good start The NSW government is to be applauded for temporarily scrapping stamp duty for first-home buyers purchasing newly built properties up to $800,000. This is designed to spur virus recovery.

The subject of housing stamp duty has been under the spotlight ever since the introduction of the GST in 1999.

Economists and think tanks have universally chorused that the tax with its GST implications should be abolished and or replaced.

The change while welcome is temporary, narrowly focused and price-capped. NSW is in a deep hole with the COVID-19 virus pandemic. We need a bigger shovel. Peter Penglis, Kambah

Death march danger The stupidity of Black Lives Matter protest organisers knows no bounds (Protest and face jail time, 27/7).

Any protest would now be illegal and against dire warnings from the court, police and the NSW government about the great danger of spreading a killer virus.

But, apparently, they will still march. Such a move would defeat its purpose of saving lives.

With COVID-19 seemingly rampant throughout Sydney, they are putting everyone's lives in jeopardy - no matter whether the colour of your skin is black, brown or white - with their reckless attitude.

It would seem that any march would be more for pure spite and against all the best medical experts' advice.

Robert Livingstone, Alexandria

Free to act responsibly People value their freedom and many have fought and died to protect it (Protest and face jail time, 27/7).

They would be horrified that freedom could include the right to be stupid and endanger others.

You can hold whatever stupid belief you want but exercising your freedom should never put people's freedom and lives at risk.

Put your masks on, keep your mouths shut and hope that real science comes up with a solution.

Dennis Fitzgerald, Box Hill, Vic

Anarchy awaits defunding To those who would have their politicians defund the police (No to defunding police - Editorial, 27/7) I ask these questions.

Which would you rather see: a motorist speeding past your kids' school at 3pm cop a fine, or devil-may-care chaos?

A petty thief arrested, or allowed to escape?

A child molester getting his just deserts or ignored?

Law and order or anarchy?

Douglas Mackenzie, Deakin, ACT

Name game shame The owners of Coon cheese should enlighten themselves with the origins of the names of two of the state's central west townships in Coonamble and Coonabarabran (Aussie icon dumps brand name after BLM backlash, 25/7).

Both names are derived from Aboriginal languages. Anyone offended? The ignorance and stupidity of corporations making decisions like this is breathtaking.

Scott, Manly

Hanging out for Tim time If ever reincarnation could happen, please let me come back with the looks of George Clooney and the wealth of Bill Gates.

No, just joking, but please let me come back with the essay skills, penmanship and wit of Tim Blair (Get creative, whiners, 27/7).

I think all Telegraph columnists are exceptional, but how I look forward to Mondays so much to read another article written by Tim.

Alan Darley, Cronulla

Briefly ...

Why suspend stamp duty for only one year (A stamp of approval, 27/7)? This loathed tax should be scrapped permanently.

David Ingram, Randwick "" " One more great has left us, but don't worry Olivia, you have not gone with the wind. We will never forget you (Hollywood legend Olivia de Havilland dies, Online 27/7).

Peter Barr, Manly "" " Finally a good news story. Greg Donaldson is inspirational and to be admired (Caring cop's stand on seats, 27/7). Top cop, top guy.

Kathe Fraser, Bellevue Hill

HAVE YOUR SAYMAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
Australia is on the back foot in the South Pacific, where China is using aid to win friends and influence our neighbours, writes Charles Miranda

News of the teleconference sent shockwaves through the halls of the headquarters of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade .

China had up on the screen senior health officials from 10 Pacific nations to discuss how the Asian giant was going to help them overcome the coronavirus crisis.

If the capacity of China to speed dial these figures at short notice on March 10 was a surprise to those in DFAT's RG Casey Building then so too was what followed.

A seven-person medical team with more than eight tonnes of kit arrived in Cambodia within days.

In Vanuatu a giant novelty-cheque was delivered to that nation's foreign minister, US$100,000 made out to the government of Vanuatu.

"Good friends feel close even when they are thousands of miles apart," Chinese Ambassador to the South Pacific republic Zhou Haicheng said before gushing how China appreciated the "valuable support" the tiny island had provided in return to China.

That support was simply by pledging allegiance.

Zoom diplomacy Similar teleconferences were held within the week by China's health officials with other nations, including a Zoom with Eastern European nations, Japan and South Korea. Even Costa Rica and French Polynesia got a one-on-one.

Goods have followed by air and sea. Fiji got 47 military vehicles to combat the virus; Australia's Defence Department had no idea.

"That they did that was not a surprise but how quickly they did it was and caught a few people off guard," one senior Australian foreign office diplomat told News Corp Australia of China's regional outreach.

"We were all still dealing with the fallout of the pandemic, Australia and Australians, but they were already out with gifts in hand and that has taught us a few things." One of those lessons was how out of step Prime Minister Scott Morrison's multi-billion Pacific Step-up program has been when at the first sign of a global crisis, all focus and attention was to domestic issues; a correct attitude perhaps for the first few weeks but months on and the obsession remains on how many hospital beds, bad boats and misbehaving backpackers we have.

If this is to be the Battle of the Pacific we had to have, then we have lost the first round.

The shame is that foreign aid in this country is still seen as some Big Brother moral obligation when it needs to be seen as a strategic imperative. Given the crisis in America and its foreign policy shift to be more insular and nationalist a question marks hangs on its capacity to maintain an active role in the region.

While regionally nations are still grappling with the domestic handling of the COVID-19 crisis and who - or WHO (World Health Organisation) - is to blame, China has been offering in its own way solutions to nations around the globe.

From China, here to help In the Pacific, China has trumpeted to Asian neighbours that at a crisis it is outwardly looking and there to help. To rub it in, it has also been flagging privately to Pacific nations that the even the once mighty United States has not been around with its aircraft carrier USS Theodore Roosevelt even forced to flee to cope with coronavirus outbreak of more than 600 crew. In total more than 150 US military bases have suffered COVID-19 cases including at all but one of its nuclear facilities. Some of the hardest hit are US assets in Japan where the US military has declared a public health emergency at its air and sea bases.

For Australia, desperate to shore up Pacific friends in good times and bad, what corona has done has highlighted when it comes to manufacturing China is the world's leader and can reach out anywhere, anytime to anyone needing it, Australia cannot compete.

And while the federal government is at pains to claim there is no competition in the Pacific between it and China, it's telling that days after China pledged ventilators for the Solomon Islands, Australia found a couple of spares and also pledged them for that country. Similar followed for Tonga and PNG.

Strings attached Professor Rory Medcalf, head of the ANU National Security College, has had three decades experience in intelligence, diplomacy and academia and said while China's charm offensive is outwardly appreciated - no less than by the US where the White House readily heaped praise in exchange for received consignments of medical goods from their sometime trade rival - it has raised red flag concerns for a region at a cross roads of alliance realignment.

But he said it is too early to say what COVID-19 will do for allegiances in the Pacific.

"There is a paradox in that China appears to have performed strongly in limiting the spread internally after the outrageous initial cover-up and now is trying to project being a good citizen internationally," Prof Medcalf said yesterday.

"But I think that a lot of the response from the region and the rest of the world is extremely more wary below the surface than it is on the surface. I think there is now a long-term quite profound resentment and wariness about China that this crisis has engendered even if China is delivering some kind of assistance in the short term." In the past fortnight it has renewed pressure on Taiwan, launched a propaganda war with the United States, France and even bizarrely Kazakhstan which it said would soon return as a state of China. It is feuding with Thailand over social media harassment of a Thai public figure, has put much of Africa off-side by alleged treatment of African-origin people in their country, notably Nigerians living in Guangzhou, and even chased, rammed and sank a Vietnamese fishing boat before rescuing the hapless fishermen in South China Sea waters.

It is also sending spy planes and survey vessels into territories of Vietnam and the Philippines and is clashing with Indonesia. Then of course there are its questionable low COVID-19 death and sick tolls and the poor quality medical masks and gowns, likened to having the resilience of a piece of tissue.

But the growing distrust of the apparent gift giving of Trojan horses by China could play into Australia's hands with Professor Medcalf believing the federal government has not taken any missteps yet in the crisis but could now look to seize the moment. And in a limited way it has already begun that through weekly dialogues with the US, India and Japan now including nations like Vietnam and South Korea.

"There is an opportunity for Australia not only to exert influence but to try and build coalitions of co-operation in the region … this is really quite a unique convergence of geopolitical competition and a transnational shock … so the next 12 to 18 months will be quite a transformational moment in regional and global stability and a whole lot of things can go wrong."

Playing catch-up Last week Australia did provide aid to Vanuatu, albeit for the Category 5 Cyclone Harold superstorm that has left tens of thousands of people homeless in Vanuatu alone, let alone the havoc and death it has wreaked in Fiji, Tonga and the Solomon Islands.

Foreign Minister Marise Payne said Australia has "strongly engaged" with Pacific partners and was now assisting with health expertise and other advice for public information campaigns via regional institutions including WHO.

She said the Australian government had moved quickly to "reorient our development partnerships" to bring forward already pledged health services funding.

Prior to the cyclone it was UNICEF and its partners that provided 170,000 essential medical packs including respirators, masks, gowns and corona-testing kits but has not the capacity to do more.

"Our small size and limited resources makes us extremely vulnerable during an emergency crisis like this," UNICEF Pacific Communications Officer Zubnah Khan blogged.

That help has to come from countries like Australia and New Zealand. Strategically, Australia has moved to better engage neighbours, reopening a mothballed naval base in PNG and offering to refurbish facilities in Fiji and the Solomons but COVID-19 has highlighted one significant shortfall - Australia's manufacturing base is reliant on China for so many goods, it has to act as a middle man to source them from China for the Pacific when China can dispatch to the Pacific direct.

Remaining focused Pacific Island nations can often be seen to think short term and readily accept Chinese pledges of cash and goods for infrastructure but the long-term payback is less considered.

Despite this Australia remains the biggest aid donor to the region, a move it is hoped can continue to guarantee open waterways and access to offshore facilities; areas China has a strong desire to achieve.

Mr Morrison late last month told G20 partners said there was never a more important time than to help the Pacific but curiously just when that help will come is unclear.

Ms Payne said yesterday COVID-19 was a significant global crisis with ramifications for the Pacific.

"We recognise that this is an impact on the world which will have significant flow-on effects to international relationships, to our stability and security in our own region," she said.

"So we're focused on supporting our friends in the Pacific, friends in South East Asia, Indonesia in particular, Timor-Leste, Papua New Guinea, making sure that when we are able to provide support Australia is delivering that."And then of course looking beyond, how we do move beyond the coronavirus experience and how we do re-engage and make sure that the things that are important to us as Australians, our values, the rule of law, the human rights that we focus on are still a core part of how we do business."
---
Morrison, more than any previous leader, understands Beijing's aim to dominate us There's no question Scott Morrison is leading the toughest strategic and policy approach towards China of any government in Australia's recent history.

Morrison's approach puts sovereignty and national security ahead of economic prosperity.

This forms the single biggest policy difference between the Turnbull and Morrison governments.

It's fair to say successive Australian governments, both Labor and the Coalition, vastly underestimated the threat a rising China could pose, a threat that increased markedly since Xi Jinping assumed the presidency in 2013.

Behind the scenes, Morrison, like Tony Abbott before him, is clear-eyed about China's ultimate intention - which is, to put it bluntly, to control the world, including Australia.

This perception of China's end goal underpins the Morrison government's foreign policy approach.

He moved swiftly this week to suspend Australia's extradition treaty with Hong Kong in the wake of China's national security law that upended the joint declaration between the UK and China over the future of Hong Kong.

Morrison was one of the first in the world to do so, along with prioritising visas for Hong Kong citizens.

Just as Morrison tore up the extradition treaty with Hong Kong, with no fuss or fanfare, it is extraordinary to reflect on the passion with which former Foreign Minister Julie Bishop pursued ratification of Australia's extradition treaty with China just three years ago.

The Howard government had negotiated the extradition treaty in an era when China was far less assertive and aggressive, but never ratified it.

Neither did Kevin Rudd, Julia Gillard or Tony Abbott, all deeply concerned about China's legal system and human rights abuses, among a myriad other powerful issues.

Official advice from the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet warned Abbott when he was Prime Minister against ratifying Australia's extradition treaty with China in a briefing note dated December 19, 2014.

He had no enthusiasm for signing it, alert to the problems of China's criminal justice system.

Inexplicably, Turnbull decided to ratify it.

DFAT's advice supported this move - indicating major problems within the public service - and there was pressure from Beijing to make it happen.

"Julie Bishop, reflecting DFAT's advice, supported ratification, as did the Attorney-General's Department," Turnbull writes in his book.

"Although it never came up at leaders' discussions, we had every reason to believe that a failure to ratify the extradition treaty would make it harder for us to ensure that China did not impose the death penalty on Australian citizens convicted of capital offences." Ruminating on how hard the Turnbull government fought to pursue a working extradition treaty with China demonstrates the stunning change in Australia's foreign policy approach in just three years.

Turnbull had long rejected the framing of China as the modern equivalent of the Soviet Union, arguing it was not "an enduring threat to the United States and its allies, and one which therefore must be contained." His attitude was influenced by China's position as our largest trading partner "in large measure responsible for our current and prospective prosperity." While Turnbull refused to sign-up to the Belt and Road initiative, he told Premier Li Keqiang Australia would be "delighted to work on specific projects." Under Turnbull's government, Chinese leadership was repeatedly assured the extradition treaty would be ratified, including in a November 2015 meeting with President Xi Jinping.

Turnbull's history paints Bishop as the driving force behind the move, but this interpretation of events is disputed.

Turnbull is understood to have phoned several MPs around 7 o'clock one morning when it was clear the ratification would not get through the Senate because of a backbench revolt led by Andrew Hastie, Tim Wilson and James Paterson.

The only one to answer his phone, perhaps not realising he was going to be on the end of a prime ministerial tirade, was Paterson.

Turnbull made it clear to the senator he was very upset with him and did not appreciate his threats to cross the floor over the issue.

Paterson had made the bombshell threat during a private briefing session with Julie Bishop and Michael Keenan, after the pair had outlined their case for why ratification should go ahead.

"It got quite terse," one MP present said.

"Julie was affronted that people were so strong and vehement in their opposition.

"But most of us couldn't even believe the situation was occurring. Why are we even having this conversation?" Another MP present said Paterson's threat to cross the floor "blew her mind." There's no doubt in the three years since these dramatic events unfolded on the international stage public sentiment has shifted.

"The whole government has woken up to this. It's impossible to ignore," one MP said of China's rising aggression and bullying tactics, which have included economic sanctions in response to Australia's routine call for an inquiry into the origins of COVID-19.

Former Foreign Minister Alexander Downer rejected suggestions the Howard government underestimated China's threat, telling me "past governments weren't dealing with the China of 2020." "This is a much more aggressive government of China than (the one) we had to deal with when I was the Foreign Minister," he said.

"That Xi Jinping has become the President of China, his government has engaged in what they like to call 'wolf warrior diplomacy', ambassadors have been exceptionally rude about their host governments, they've started using economic levers to try to threaten other countries, including us. Punishment is meted out left, right and centre and you've seen what happened in Hong Kong." As Foreign Minister, Marise Payne has already earned the respect of her colleagues. Criticism of her infrequent media appearances has given way to praise for the substance she brings to the role.

There's confidence in her ability to do the job as the threat China poses escalates.

Aside from the "grey space between peace and war" - the economic coercion, the interference in politics and business and cyber warfare - the vulnerability of Australia's situation is even more grave than this.

The Defence Strategic Update, released a week ago, warned of the rising military threat in the Indo-Pacific, stating Australia "must be better prepared for the prospect of high-intensity conflict." Morrison's comments comparing the world now to 1930s and 40s Europe demonstrates the seriousness with which he heeds this advice.
---
At first glance Antifa may look like a bunch of pimple-faced anarchists, but their aims are far more sinister

On the face of it, Antifa may appear to be a bunch of pimply activists. Yet just because they don't look like -Islamist terrorists or a hostile -uniformed army does not mean they are any less of a threat to democracy.

Because ultimately, they are globalised, networked, decentralised and violent. Antifa are terrorists whose modus operandi is to infect peaceful protests in order to instigate the use of force by police. The risk is a popular backlash against the government. And they present our geopolitical adversaries such as China and Russia with opportunities to destabilise our system from within.

In a world full of snakes Antifa are no less of a threat to Australia than anyone else, due to their tactic of "people's war".

In a people's war, an insurgent force is organised into small units, dependent on support from within the local population. This is built through infiltrating layers of a government, community and civil society, now hyper-connected and instantly mobilised by -social media.

This idea of the people's war developed by North Vietnamese military leader Nguygen Giap, followed Mao Zedong's thesis On Guerrilla Warfare. Argentinian Marxist revolutionary, Che Guevara (1928 - 1967) was also a fan.

Spontaneous general uprisings are one of their most effective tools, especially where weak-kneed elected representatives surround the executive branch of government.

The laws of separation suggest the seven and a half thousand Australian Antifa Facebook supporters have potential to create our own nightmare. Easy to initiate, low cost to -resource, and self-escalating where anyone can join.

The grain-fed, Nike sneaker-wearing, iPhone-carrying Antifa of today is not a new phenomenon.

When confronted with the Anarchists, the 1900s terrorist phenomenon of his time, US President Theodore Roosevelt said: "The anarchist is the enemy of humanity, the enemy of all mankind and is a deeper degree of criminality than any other." It was one of the most successful terrorist movements of the time.

One of Karl Marx's rivals, Russian revolutionary Mikhail Bakunin (1814 - 76), declared: "We recognise no other activity but the work of extermination. We admit the forms in which the activity will show itself will be extremely varied - poison, the knife, the rope etc … In this struggle, revolution sanctifies everything alike." From 1892 to 1894 Paris was subjected to eleven bombings.

In 1920, 38 people were killed and hundreds wounded in New York when a horse-drawn cart filled with explosives was detonated on Wall Street.

Even Australia felt the impact of anarchist terrorism. On 28 May 1898 a bomb exploded outside Daniel Maloney's house in the Melbourne suburb of Fitzroy.

It caused a sensation at the time. By 1914 anarchists had attacked sixteen nations. More recent examples are the Italian Red Brigade and the West German Red Army Faction. All could be defined as homegrown -terrorists.

We are living in one of the most precarious times since the Cold War. The West is severely weakened by measures to defeat COVID-19. Powerful geopolitical forces are at play and the stakes are high.

An attack on our system does not need to come via tanks and battleships. Far better to support your enemy's internal enemies and undermine legitimacy from within.

That is why we need to maintain a Sauron's eye for efforts by states to use Antifa as a destabilising proxy force.

If you think all this sounds far-fetched consider how swiftly life can change and events can converge.

The collapse of the Berlin Wall, the Arab Spring, coups in Fiji, riots in the Solomons, Ukraine and now Hong Kong, are good examples.

Some of the most dangerous terrorist and revolutionary organisations such as al Qaeda started as small groups no one took seriously.

On June 8, in the US city of Seattle, Antifa-led insurgents took control of the Capital Hill Precinct (ironically policing barricades with M-4 armed guards). Going in heavy risks making the US look no better than China.

Unlike states or non-state actors with a classic command and control structure, these postmodern anarchists are hard for law enforcement to disrupt.

Use force, you are accused of stepping on their civil rights. Don't use force and innocent people and their property are bashed, looted and set on fire.

Then there is the question of who do you attack?

Effectively, the movement has adopted the TE Lawrence approach of being an idea or a thing, invulnerable, without front or back with a high degree of fluidity of action.

One of Antifa's clever tactics has been to infect peaceful protests such as those in the US and the climate protests in Australia.

Consider how our immune system works.

If Antifa resembled a virus embedded within its host the aim is to create a hyper-immune response. In other words, your own immune system -becomes the killer.

Equally dire is the belief by corporations that the cure requires acquiescing to their demands. Best to deal with them at their origin than at their growth stage.

Our opponents (all non-Western) and non-state actors such as Islamist extremists and now these pimply faced anarchists are flexible and agile.

For example, support by the new-age feminists and social activist movements of nonviolent Islamic extremism and its treatment of women might seem peculiar.

Other examples are the alliance between Hezbollah and Mexican drug cartels, Somali pirates and terrorists, or terrorists and people smugglers in North Africa. Those involved in human and drug trafficking, weapons smuggling and organised crime would happily form alliances with the likes of Antifa.

All thrive on chaos and hate the same system.

Even though they hate our democratic institutions describing Antifa as terrorists will not win many friends in mainstream media or academia.

Yet, threats to Australia will be increasingly dominated by the synthesis of technology, extremism and financing, all employed to advance the strategic interests of our opponents both foreign and domestic.

Recent weeks have shown how internal dissent is never far below the surface and could become one of our most significant political risks. Dr. Jason Thomas is director, Frontier Assessments
---
Confidential looks back on a COVID-ruled 2020 and the stars behind the year's biggest headlines

Any pretty face can book a job, says Sydney-based model Georgia Fowler - but only a pro can build a career.

And the Kiwi-born stunner would know. The latter half of 2020 has turned into a seminal era for the 27-year-old who has become one of the world's most in-demand models seemingly overnight, booking lucrative campaigns for Louis Vuitton, Topshop, Victoria Secret, Fendi, Dior, Burberry and Cartier in the space of just a few months.

It is a purple patch that has also rocketed the catwalk queen to the top of the international money list, with her estimated 2020 earnings inching the $1 million mark.

The key to her success, she tells Confidential, lies in the work ethic she inherited from her former golf pro dad Peter Fowler.

"I'm a really persistent person and I think that is in my blood a little bit. My dad was a pro golfer and he was famous for being the first one on the practice course and the last one off it," says Fowler.

"But I also think it comes from being in the game for nearly 12 years. Brands and clients really know me now and photographers know that I am going to work hard.

"Any beautiful face can book one job but it's the re-bookings that make your career."

DINING DO-OVER THE surge of COVID-19 in March saw Sydney's dynamic dining scene brought to its knees as restaurants shuttered one-by-one and business owners were left wondering if they would ever recover.

However, with crisis came ingenuity as many top eateries - from cafes to fine diners - were re-imagined. Pubs became grocery stores, bakeries sold toilet paper and white-table cloth restaurants sent their armies of black-tie waiters out into the streets on mopeds as high-end food and cocktail delivery drivers.

It was Sydney's culinary spirit writ large and, as business now returns to normal, will be remembered as a true phoenix from the ashes moment.

"Eight months since this all started business is better for us than it has ever been," says Darryl Martin, whose Marrickville eatery Bazaari was transformed from a high-end diner to a thriving takeaway and delivery service during the shutdown.

"Compared to where we were a year ago business is up 200 per cent. Now things are back to normal we have done away with the delivery side of things but we are still doing a truckload of takeaways which is a revenue stream we never had before.

"It has been rocky, don't get me wrong. But we have returned to being a stable business and for that we are very grateful."

HELLO HOLLYWOOD Kicking the pandemic's butt brought with it some unexpected but welcome windfalls for Australia - none more so than the unprecedented flood of Hollywood studios and streaming services who clamoured to relocate productions to our virtually COVID-free shores.

By August every major film and TV star, by way of Byron Bay, seemed to be alighting in Sydney to begin a backlog of blockbuster productions which continue to pump millions into the local film economy - Mark Wahlberg, Zac Efron, Idris Elba, Natalie Portman, Liam Neeson, Nicole Kidman, Melissa McCarthy and Chris Evans to name just a few.

In fact the boom, according to local set builder Greg Hadju who has 40 years of experience under his belt, is nothing short of an entertainment industry "gold rush" moment.

"There have been booms but this is definitely the biggest one in long time," says Hadju, who constructed the elaborate sets being used on - among other major productions - Thor: Love and Thunder and the upcoming $60 million George Miller epic Three Thousand Years of Longing.

"It is the first time I have ever been in the position where I have had to turn work away because I can't find the crews."

AND WHO COULD FORGET...

Broadway beckons for Farnsy: In news that falls under the banner of "what took so long", it was announced this year that the music of legendary Aussie crooner John Farnham will finally make it to the stage. Theatre impresario Michael Cassel (who is bringing Hamilton to the stage in Australia) will oversee the production which will not be based on Farnham's life but instead will be a fictional story set to a Farnham soundtrack.

SAS surprise: Channel 7 may have taken some hits at the start of the year - none more regrettable than the DOA turkey that was Plate of Origin. But the network came home strong this year with SAS: Australia which pitted a pile of celebs, including former Miss Universe Erin McNaught and rugby player Nick Cummins, against each other in a military endurance course and earned the network the year's best new reality concept. Movie-star romance: It was the unconventional love story we couldn't get enough of in 2020. Movie star Zac Efron swaps Hollywood for Byron Bay and subsequently falls for the local coffee shop waitress. Six months on the pair have weathered break-up rumours and continue to live the fairytale - giving hope to frustrated cafe workers everywhere.
---
Step up in the region or China will take over, intel boss warns THE former intelligence chief to the US Navy's -Pacific Fleet has called on the Australian government to "aggressively" reach out to our Pacific Island neighbours with aid packages to counter Chinese influence in the region.

Captain Jim Fanell (pictured) said failure to do so means it is "just a matter of time before the nations of the South Pacific begin to see PLA navy warships and air force military aircraft plying their waters and flying across their airways".

His warning comes as analysts indicate Kiribati's Christmas Island Pacific atoll 2000km south of -Hawaii could be the next target for China to try and build a military base.

Captain Fanell said the re-election of Kiribati president Taneti Maamau just months after he ditched support of Taiwan in favour of Beijing "is an indicator of the growing effectiveness of the PRC's strategic influencing campaign across the South Pacific".

"It seems likely that Beijing will provide Kiribati huge amounts of money that are contingent upon -allowing the People's Republic of China to have greater access and exclusionary rights in this tiny atoll nation," he said.

China is now the third largest supplier of cash in the region - behind Australia and New Zealand.

Australian money comes in the form of aid whereas China's largely comes in the form of loans for big infrastructure projects that are then built by Chinese -companies.

Chinese loans have been labelled debt-trap diplomacy and for some nations - such as Tonga - more than half the country's debt is owed to China.

It proved a trap for Sri Lanka two years ago when it was forced to hand China control of a Chinese built port on a 99-year lease to pay off a $14 billion debt.

"Over the past three years, scores of PRC government officials have been travelling Oceania to offer infrastructure deals and it now appears their work is beginning to pay off," Captain Fanell said.

In 2017 China released a paper called Vision for Maritime Cooperation under the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) which outlined its plan to expand influence into the Pacific through big civilian infrastructure programs.

Captain Fanell said the building of civilian ports, such as an 800m quay in Vanuatu, could be paving the way for the Chinese navy in the future. "Many questioned the necessity for such a large wharf given Vanuatu's economic circumstances, but from a military perspective it would appear that this dock would allow PLA navy warships a perfect harbour in the future," he said.

Jonathan Pryke, the Lowy Institute's Pacific Islands -expert, said the port on Kiribati's Christmas Island atoll "would be of clear strategic benefit to China".

Kiribati has a population of just 110,000 spread over 33 islands as part of an exclusive economic zone larger than India and a host of problems including non-communicative diseases and rising sea levels that would benefit from Chinese aid.

"Australia and its allies will need to be vigilant that this assistance doesn't come with some kind of concession to give China a strategic foothold," Mr Pryke said.

China has already tried to establish bases in the Pacific. Just days after the Solomon Islands ditched support for Taiwan in favour of Beijing last year, a Chinese company attempted to lease all of Tulagi Island with its perfect deepwater harbour. That was rejected as unlawful by the courts.

Captain Fannell warned a string of Chinese bases across the Pacific would -profoundly affect Australia's strategic and defence -thinking.

"The danger for Australia is that Beijing will use their new BRI partnerships to further manipulate the international order in its favour and thus empower it to take punitive actions against Australia if it does not kowtow to the Chinese Communist Party's demands," he said.

"Australia has just witnessed this over the issue of Prime Minister Morrison's legitimate inquiry into the origins of the coronavirus. The PRC not only refused to accept such a query, but went one step further and penalised Australia for even asking the question." Captain Fanell said Australia needed to "aggressively" reach out to Pacific nations to offer aid while at the same time talking to "Washington, Tokyo and Taipei to offer comprehensive solutions to these -nations problems." The first step should be to help Kiribati, in the heart of the world's largest tuna belt, to build a viable fishing -industry before China stepped in to do that instead.

A Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade spokesman said Australia was pumping a record $1.4 billion a year into the Pacific as part of Pacific Step-up, which had "pivoted our development assistance to prioritise what Pacific nations need most in the context of COVID-19.

"We welcome commitments from others that support sustainable development and respond to the priorities of our region," the spokesman said.

"The Australian Government looks forward to continuing to work closely with Kiribati President Taneti Maamau, following his -re-election." The Chinese consulate did not respond to requests for comment.

PAPUA NEW GUINEA

DEBT........91% GRANTS...$81.6m LOANS.....$593m FIJI DEBT........87% GRANTS...$57.1m LOANS.....$389m SAMOA DEBT........69% GRANTS...$58m LOANS.....$236m VANUATU DEBT........68% GRANTS...$103.4m LOANS.....$221m TONGA DEBT........67% GRANTS...$75.77m LOANS.....$154m COOK ISLANDS DEBT........20% GRANTS...$23.17m LOANS.....$5.5m

AVERAGE TOTAL DEBT .......76% GRANTS ..$505.6m LOANS.....$1.6B
---
MINE THREAT TO PILLARS OF HORSE INDUSTRY I am writing in support of Coolmore Australia and Godolphin regarding your article on the battle to stop a mine development on their doorstep (Turf war goes underground as stud faces mine, 20/11).

I am dismayed to learn that mining groups continue to relentlessly pursue the land which forms the cornerstone of Australia's thoroughbred racing and breeding industry.

The amount of time, energy and money that has gone into constantly fighting the mines' failed attempts to establish large operations in the heart of horse breeding country is ridiculous.

The newly-proposed Maxwell mine's proximity to two of Australia's most prestigious horse studs, Coolmore Australia and Godolphin, threatens to not only profoundly impact the thoroughbred industry but also the water supply and the health of the animals and people that live there.

I grew up on Coolmore Australia and witnessed first hand the love that is put into cultivating this stunning property and their world-class care of horses.

I am not against mining and I understand that it is an important industry in the Upper Hunter.

But, the fact remains that the proximity of this mine to these pillars of the Australian thoroughbred industry is unacceptable.

I urge the ministers and state government to not allow a new attack on these properties.

Kristen Grimley, Coogee

Army top brass needs to come under fire too The allegations of atrocities in Afghanistan by soldiers is alarming but conclusions should not be drawn until a full and fair investigation is conducted.

After a 40-year association with the army I find it difficult, or perhaps impossible, to believe that knowledge or at least strong rumour of these allegations had not reached top echelons of the military some time ago (Rank behaviour: How did ADF top brass fail to acknowledge grim realities on ground for troops, 20/11).

If it is to be, let not the axe fall on only the lower ranks. Brian Whybrow, Wanniassa, ACT

War crimes a national tragedy It is a profound psychological shock to the nation that innocent citizens and children have been murdered by a 'warrior' coterie of special forces (Dagger to the heart, 20/11).

Our long-prized ethic of fair go and decency has been violated. So has our proud history of complying with humane protocols about the treatment of others in war.

Deploring the likes of al-Qaeda now will sound hollow. Descending to such abysmal levels ourselves might have terrible future consequences for our own captured servicemen and women.

Also, occasions like Anzac Day and Remembrance Day might be infected by these shocking events by distracting from honourable thoughts of commemoration and heroism.

What a national tragedy.

Ron Sinclair, Bathurst

Brave history not tarnished The allegations against Australian special forces are frightening and disappointing to say the least (Dagger to the heart, 20/11).

The history of Australian forces in combat is impeccable and should be remembered when the current allegations are investigated.

Any negative findings should not reflect in any way on men and women who have served this country in the past or are current enlisted (and innocent) personnel.

It is alleged 19 soldiers killed 39 civilians or prisoners outside the guidelines of the Geneva Convention.

These alleged occurrences should be investigated thoroughly to establish if there is any wrongdoing and each allegation should be investigated on it's merits.

Hopefully, the investigation will not be long and drawn out in order that we can move forward.

Brian Tovey, Hammondville NSW

Speed limit signs are enough I don't understand all the fuss about the removal of what are called warning signs alerting motorists to speed camera locations (No warning signs for speeders, 19/11).

There are always warning signs - they consist of a set of large black numbers inside a big red circle on a large white background posted at the roadside.

That sign should be all that is needed to warn people to stay below a certain speed.

Doug Richards, Tamarama

Taming our schools Principals and teachers are facing record levels of stress and burnout as violence and offensive behaviour continues to rise in NSW schools (School under siege, Saturday 14/11).

A case in point was a vicious bashing of a Year 9 girl at a Western Sydney high school, the latest in a string of at least 12 serious incidents at the school since July this year.

The state government has reacted with an army of nurses to be posted to primary and high schools to treat and refer pupils dealing with mental health issues (Nurse army to the rescue, Sunday 15/11). Let's hope the state government also have further measures in mind to bring about healthy change at our schools.

Peter Penglis, Kambah, ACT

Regional power struggle Right now, Prime Minister Scott Morrison doesn't need a lecture from China's bullying government on the best way for Australia to manage its sovereign interests (True blue values not for trade, 20/11). As the PM rightly states, "Australia's values are not up for trade".

Perhaps the PM should also politely remind President Xi, that Australia doesn't need to keep importing China's cheap solar panels either ... we are happy with our locally-sourced, reliable cheap baseload coal and gas power.

Bob Partington, Wahroonga

Expensive complexities The NSW Treasurer has good intentions in wanting to change the tax regime when buying a house (Dom's call of duty, 18/11).

But the problem really starts earlier than the buying/selling of a house - it's in the building of it.

Council regulations and applications are painstaking and expensive not to mention time delays. Then there's building regulations bound so tightly in red and green tape.

You need a workforce to begin with and trying to make sense of the building and construction award is harder than putting a man on the moon and just as expensive.

You need licences like never before (a licence to have so many licences is about the only one they haven't thought of yet).

You need office staff to report every action you take for the ATO who will then cross check with everyone else who cross checks.

And, to think you haven't even turned a sod yet.

Barry Laurie, Tweed Heads

A message to you, Rudy Fake news or does Giuliani dye his hair dark (Hair dye sweat drips down Giuliani's face in press conference - Online, 20/11)?

At last we are getting down to the important issues in the recent election. Give up dyeing it Rudy, no one cares and soon you will be out of the public view as the election results are finalised.

Dennis Fitzgerald, Box Hill, Victoria

Briefly ...

The emperor Nero fiddled while Rome burnt and US President Donald Trump is playing golf while America is in turmoil and people are passing in high numbers from COVID-19.

Ed Partyka, Coffs Harbour "" " Okay, so Brad Fittler after two successful origins, misses the third. He is still by far the best person to restore our rightful place as greater than Queensland.

Geoff Hinds, Merrylands "" " Cameron Smith had better retire otherwise he'll be playing reserve grade if Harry Grant returns to the Storm next season. What a revelation this young fella is and what a career lies ahead for him.

John McKinnon, Kareela

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
MUNDINE HITS THE SWEET SPOT Anyone who has played sport at any level knows exactly what the "the sweet spot" is - an indisputable winner.

Warren Mundine's Daily Telegraph article (Our song and our game, 30/10) is an indelible sweet spot of truth.

Paul, Central Coast.

"" " What a fantastic opinion piece by Warren Mundine regarding the national anthem (Our song and our game, 30/10).

His comment that "if it wasn't for the general sports-loving Australian public who love to sing the anthem you highly paid sportspeople wouldn't be highly paid" has hit the nail right on the head.

John Stuart, St Fillans "" " Wonderful! Wonderful! Warren!

Thank you so much for your article today (Our song and our game, 30/10). You have restored my faith in human nature and I'm thrilled that the underestimated ability of having "commonsense" is still alive.

Ann Barnes, Davistown "" " I read Warren Mundine's article on the national anthem controversy (Our song and our game, 30/10).

All I can say about it is that he is a wonderful man with an Australian Aboriginal heart.

He should be our next prime minister.

The players that don't want the anthem are overpaid and should go and get a real job.

Leslie Parker, NSW

Rejoicing over uniting behind our anthem The backlash to the NRL's initial decision to ban the national anthem at the State of Origin gives me faith in my fellow Australians (All let us rejoice, 30/10).

Having gone through the bushfires and then COVID-19, the footy season has given us all a reason to cheer, thanks to Peter V'landys' brilliant negotiation skills.

Politics should never be a part of sport, therefore I am prepared to forgive the original misstep by the football officials on this occasion.

"We are one, we are Australian" and "united we stand, divided we fall"; just look at what is happening in America.

Janice Russell, Malua Bay

Protecting a national asset NRL officials were 100 per cent correct to initially omit the national anthem from State of Origin games (Origin of a backflip, 30/10). They were right, but for the wrong reasons.

The anthem should only be heard at events of national or international significance.

Military and state funerals, remembrance days and sporting occasions against other nations are appropriate.

Permission should be sought to use it, so valuable should it be to our national psyche.

It should not be allowed to be a political football for activists to show disrespect before polemic sporting games.

We must treat it as one of our truly national assets, withheld from frivolous overuse and devalued by those undermining our national identity and unity.

Aggressive, divisive and competing sporting teams pitting Australians against each other is surely the exact opposite to the call for unison echoing through the chords and lyrics of our anthem.

Alan Sexton, North Parramatta

Horror at French attack I was deeply shocked and saddened by the terrorist attack that took place in a church - the Notre Dame Basilica in Nice, France (Three parishioners dead in bloody terrorist attack, 30/10).

My thoughts and prayers are with the families of the victims and their loved ones.

I strongly condemn this terrorist attack and request everyone to stay united against this extreme violence so that we can defeat this extremist behaviour and ideology that is totally against the peaceful teaching of Islam.

Syed Sadaqat Ahmed, Tarneit, Victoria

Outrage on the menu What are they teaching university students these days? Have they introduced a new course that teaches people how to be outraged for no reason about things that have absolutely no effect on their lives?

Take the recent outrage from a university student on social media calling for the boycotting of a restaurant in Waterloo and labelling the owner a racist all because he said he supported Donald Trump in the upcoming US election (A meal with a side of Trump, 30/10).

Who cares? If I was that university student I would be asking myself why what other people think about a politician in a different country makes them so angry and consulting a dictionary to find out what the word racist really means.

I think it's actually just confected outrage expressed by sheep pretending they are activists, who think they are somehow supporting their compatriots in the US.

B Thompson, Cowra

Nazi stain needs erasing In recent times auction houses in Australia and New Zealand have been involved in the trade of Nazi memorabilia including flags.

On occasion Nazi objects have been pulled from sale due to public pressure. We are now told Nazi flags have been flown in public, including from suburban back yards, at least 31 times in the past two years (Nazi flags fly over NSW, Sunday 25/10).

It seems Section 93Z of the Crimes Act does not go far enough to outlaw Nazi flags from being flown.

Now there are calls for government action to stop this "racist cancer" in NSW. The government needs to take action to ban trade in these vile artefacts and, secondly, beef-up the Crimes Act in relation to flying Nazi flags.

Peter Penglis, Kambah, ACT

Postal boss deserves apology ScoMo, I think you made a big mistake in pillorying Christine Holgate in parliament ('Humiliated' by the PM, 30/10).

She deserved better than that. You should now apologise immediately - quietly if necessary - and find a way to set it right.

It's now time to admit to your over-reaction.

Chris Welch, Drummoyne

Is Anybody to blame?

I have listened diligently to the Board of Inquiry hearing and I have finally worked out the story of the hotel quarantine bungle in Victoria.

There were four people responsible named Everybody, Somebody, Anybody and Nobody.

There was an important job to be done and Everybody was sure that Somebody would do it.

Anybody could have done it, but Nobody did it.

Somebody got angry about that because it was Everybody's job. Everybody thought Anybody could do it, but nobody realised that Everybody wouldn't do it.

It ended up that Everybody blamed Somebody when Nobody did what Anybody could have.

I'm glad I cleared that up for you all. Good for a laugh in these tough times, especially in Victoria.

K. Bryant, Rivett, ACT

Briefly … Why are some condemning Annastacia Palaszczuk for closing the Queensland border, but praising Gladys Berejiklian for closing the NSW border to Victorians? A case of double standards?

Colleen Northam, Taree "" " Dear Matt Kean, please come to the Hunter Valley if you're game and explain to coal miners and gas workers why you want to destroy their livelihoods with renewables (He's Kean on green reasoning, not on gas, 29/10).

Dazza, Singleton "" " Where are all the brave and fearless leaders? Annastacia Palaszczuk and Joe Biden both want to win elections based on fear, fear and more fear. A sure-fire race to the bottom.

Arvid, Kiama

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
BEFORE he lifts weights now Nathan Cleary must first clear the garage. Move his car, then shift to one corner that blue Victa lawnmower with grass stuck in thick clumps around each wheel.

Beside his dumbbells, sit five paint tins. Next to that, a small beer fridge. "So it isn't much of a gym," Cleary said, almost apologetically. "But it's enough." With Australian sport now effectively locked down due to the COVID-19 pandemic, The Daily Telegraph today begins its first instalment of a series dubbed: "A Day In -Isolation With …" For while sport around the world may have stopped, -athletes like Cleary haven't. Which is why over coming weeks - and potentially months - we'll take you inside the garage gyms and backyard training fields of NRL stars, UFC fighters, even Olympians.

Makes for some adjusting. Especially for Cleary, the 22-year-old Penrith halfback who usually shifts weights -inside that plush $22 million Panthers Academy with its lifting platforms, oversized kitchen and 12-man plunge pools.

Given it opened in 2016, the same year as his top-grade debut, Cleary has spent his entire NRL career growing at a facility widely regarded as the best in Australian sport.

But now? Um, no.

With Panthers HQ officially shut down from today, Cleary is instead churning through gym lifts like Arnies, Skull Crushers and the 'ol Military Press next to timber piles and Roundup.

"I actually didn't realise how dirty it was in here," he joked when pushed on the state of his new gym.

"So I've used day one to clean everything out." Quizzed on how it felt to suddenly be removed from the routine of NRL life, Cleary conceded: "Oh, it was definitely weird to wake up this morning without anything really to do.

"But it's good to get back to training like when you were a teenager coming through the grades. Humbling, too.

"That, and a good reminder how, no matter what, you have to find a way to get things done." Apart from being kitted out by Panthers staff with a barbell and 150kg in plates, Cleary has also been given an oversized net for passing and goalkicking practice.

"Although I think I'll save the kicking for down at my local park when nobody's around," he said. "I'm too worried about my footies disappearing over the fence." Elsewhere, the playmaker with five NSW Origin caps has managed to convince his two housemates to join him in training sessions for however long the coronavirus shutdown continues.

"And my mate Reece and I, we've actually got a bet on," the Panthers No. 7 explained.

"He reckons he can put on 6kg of muscle in three weeks.

"So, I was happy to take that. He's no chance." Cleary has plenty of reason to stay focused after adding 4kg of muscle over summer.

"But more than maintaining physique I just want to ensure that, whenever this season starts up again, I'm ready," Cleary said.

Which is why on day one of isolation, Cleary was lifting.Or at least right after he moved the car, shifted some paint tins, then pushed that Victa lawnmower into the corner.
---
Step up in the region or China will take over, intel boss warns

THE former intelligence chief to the US Navy's -Pacific Fleet has called on the Australian government to "aggressively" reach out to our Pacific Island neighbours with aid packages to counter the influence of China in the region.

Captain Jim Fanell (pictured) said failure to do so means it is "just a matter of time before the nations of the South Pacific begin to see PLA navy warships and air force military aircraft plying their waters and flying across their airways".

His warning comes as analysts indicate Kiribati's Christmas Island Pacific atoll 2000km south of -Hawaii could be the next target for China to try and build a military base.

Captain Fanell said the re-election of Kiribati president Taneti Maamau just months after he ditched support of Taiwan in favour of Beijing "is an indicator of the growing effectiveness of the PRC's strategic influencing campaign across the South Pacific".

"It seems likely that Beijing will provide Kiribati huge amounts of money that are contingent upon -allowing the People's Republic of China to have greater access and exclusionary rights in this tiny atoll nation," he said.

China is now the third largest supplier of cash in the region - behind Australia and New Zealand.

Australian money comes in the form of aid whereas China's largely comes in the form of loans for big infrastructure projects that are then built by Chinese -companies.

Chinese loans have been labelled debt-trap diplomacy and for some nations - such as Tonga - more than half the country's debt is owed to China.

It proved a trap for Sri Lanka two years ago when it was forced to hand China control of a Chinese built port on a 99-year lease to pay off a $14 billion debt.

"Over the past three years, scores of PRC government officials have been travelling Oceania to offer infrastructure deals and it now appears their work is beginning to pay off," Captain Fanell said.

In 2017 China released a paper called Vision for Maritime Cooperation under the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) which outlined its plan to expand influence into the Pacific through big civilian infrastructure programs.

Captain Fanell said the building of civilian ports, such as an 800m quay in Vanuatu, could be paving the way for the Chinese navy in the future. "Many questioned the necessity for such a large wharf given Vanuatu's economic circumstances, but from a military perspective it would appear that this dock would allow PLA navy warships a perfect harbour in the future," he said.

Jonathan Pryke, the Lowy Institute's Pacific Islands -expert, said the port on Kiribati's Christmas Island atoll "would be of clear strategic benefit to China".

Kiribati has a population of just 110,000 spread over 33 islands as part of an exclusive economic zone larger than India and a host of problems including non-communicative diseases and rising sea levels that would benefit from Chinese aid.

"Australia and its allies will need to be vigilant that this assistance doesn't come with some kind of concession to give China a strategic foothold," Mr Pryke said.

China has already tried to establish bases in the Pacific. Just days after the Solomon Islands ditched support for Taiwan in favour of Beijing last year, a Chinese company attempted to lease all of Tulagi Island with its perfect deepwater harbour. That was rejected as unlawful by the courts.

Captain Fannell warned a string of Chinese bases across the Pacific would -profoundly affect Australia's strategic and defence -thinking.

"The danger for Australia is that Beijing will use their new BRI partnerships to further manipulate the international order in its favour and thus empower it to take punitive actions against Australia if it does not kowtow to the Chinese Communist Party's demands," he said.

"Australia has just witnessed this over the issue of Prime Minister Morrison's legitimate inquiry into the origins of the coronavirus. The PRC not only refused to accept such a query, but went one step further and penalised Australia for even asking the question." Captain Fanell said Australia needed to "aggressively" reach out to Pacific nations to offer aid while at the same time talking to "Washington, Tokyo and Taipei to offer comprehensive solutions to these -nations problems." The first step should be to help Kiribati, in the heart of the world's largest tuna belt, to build a viable fishing -industry before China stepped in to do that instead.

A Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade spokesman said Australia was pumping a record $1.4 billion a year into the Pacific as part of Pacific Step-up, which had "pivoted our development assistance to prioritise what Pacific nations need most in the context of COVID-19.

"We welcome commitments from others that support sustainable development and respond to the priorities of our region," the spokesman said.

"The Australian Government looks forward to continuing to work closely with Kiribati President Taneti Maamau, following his -re-election." The Chinese consulate did not respond to requests for comment.
---
SOMEWHERE hidden away in Port Kembla is Hill 60.

An old World War II military stronghold which rises some 70m above sea level in a patchwork of ageing gun batteries, tunnels and one unthinkably steep bitumen road.

Years ago, it was the Illawarra Steelers' proving ground.

With late, great coach Graham Murray - who spent five years leading the club in the 90s - particularly fond of sending his scarlet and white troops up said hill every pre-season.

Yet today?

It belongs to Alex Volkanovski.

The Australian UFC champion who has adapted his own program from that forged by the likes of Steelers greats Rod Wishart, Paul McGregor, John Simon and Neil Piccinelli.

"And now that I'm likely headed for some private island," Volkanovski said this week, "there's going to be a lot more climbing".

While most of world sport remains in lockdown, Australia's UFC featherweight champ is quietly running up hills in preparation for a title defence he knows nothing about.

Only that it's coming.

Especially given this past week, UFC president Dana White has announced UFC 249 for May 10 (AEST), three events for that week, and also suggested his hyped 'Fight Island' project will be operational for international athletes by June.

Enter Volkanovski.

After claiming the UFC strap from Hawaiian Max Holloway in December, this 31-year-old Wollongong fighter was firming for a title rematch at UFC 250 in Perth, this June.

However with the COVID-19 outbreak cancelling that card, Volkanovski is now gunning to lead off on Fight Island, complete with Octagon on the beach.

Which is why, with NSW in lockdown, and his Freestyle Fighting Gym shuttered, Volkanovski has started on the most unique training camp of his fight career.

Each morning, the UFC champ connects via zoom with his strength and conditioning coach Chrisy Jaffrey, who doubles as an exercise physiologist at the BaiMed Performance Centre.

Located just outside Wollongong, BaiMed's staff have not only worked with the NSW Origin side, but also NRL premiership teams from St George Illawarra and Cronulla.

Elsewhere, Matildas striker Caitlin Foord also employs the specialist training team, as did US basketball prodigy LaMelo Ball when Down Under with the Illawarra Hawks.

So with Jaffrey providing instruction, Volkanovski does weights in his lounge room, conditioning in the backyard and, increasingly, arduous solo sessions up Hill 60.

"We use the hills around Port Kembla to work on aerobic power," Jaffrey explained. "It's actually based off the old Steelers program.

"Near the top of Hill 60, it also becomes about pushing the body and mind to its limits. Really driving the heart rate up to reach maximum and develop aerobic power." Asked about the hill climbs, Volkanovski added: "I have no idea how I explain the road's steepness - other than to say I don't think houses are allowed be built anywhere up it.

"But this is what I need to do.

"Because if there is one guy can get us fighting on a beach, it's Dana White. So I think you'll see me fighting on an island soon."

IN ISOLATION WITH ... Alexander VolkanovskiWatch the video @dailytelegraph.com.au
---
Beijing's gutter social media play is provocative - and it means to be. They want to use outrage over alleged war crimes to divide our politics and society against itself Here's a little thought experiment for you: If Chinese special forces were accused of committing war crimes overseas, do you think Beijing would investigate the matter and then issue a very public and highly embarrassing report -revealing their misdeeds for all the world to see?

Of course not.

Indeed it's tempting, given the country's behaviour from Xinjiang to Hong Kong, to say they'd probably give the troops in question a medal.

Which makes yesterday's tweet heard 'round the world all the more galling. The idea that China - China! - of all nations would suddenly decide to come across as peacenik as a bearded old crusty selling Green Left Weekly is just too much to bear.

In Yiddish, the word is chutzpah - often jokingly described as what someone has who kills their parents, then throws themselves on the mercy of the court on account of being an -orphan.

And that's about the sum of it.

Because how else can you look at a nation whose totalitarian government maintains concentration camps, uses political prisoners for slave labour, and so much besides criticising Australia for bad behaviour?

Of course no nation is perfect, but the cognitive dissonance is almost too much to bear.

The tweet in question, sent by one of China's chief "wolf warrior" diplomats, was so over the top that it is almost sure to cause a miscalculation and an over-reaction.

Coming from the account of -Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian, it read, "shocked by murder of Afghan civilians & prisoners by Australian soldiers …. we strongly condemn such acts, & call for holding them accountable".

To drive the point home, Zhao included a fake photo of an Australian soldier holding a knife to a child's throat over an Afghan flag.

Its sheer ballsiness was calculated pitch-perfectly to offend the government's honour, provoke reaction, and (this is the real trap) wedge the Australian electorate into two camps.

The aim, from Beijing's point of view, is to shift attention from Australians' increasingly bipartisan anger at their economic bullying and divide the country roughly into two camps: On the one side the China hawks, mostly on the right, who think we should keep going hard in our dealings with the CCP and give them no quarter.

And on the other, the doves, whose instincts are to think that if we've got a problem with another nation, it's probably our fault, and who tend to hold common cause with an Australian left that's happy to see anyone take the near-sacred place of Australia's military down a peg.

This faction has been increasingly in evidence as things have heated up between our two nations.

Last week commentators on the left were quick to blame the Morrison government's diplomacy, and not China's claims against Australia's sovereignty, for increased tariffs on Australian wine.

If we'd just given in, everything would be fine, is the implication. The same goes for those who say we should never have taken the lead on demanding an investigation of the origins of the COVID-19 pandemic.

You can understand how China might think they'd get what they think is a fair hearing in some quarters here.

As a strategy it's a direct echo of the old Soviet Union which, during the Cold War, sought to distract attention from its own human rights horror show by pointing to America's civil rights dramas and the plight of Blacks living in the inner city.

After all, they would ask, how can you complain about gulags when there are ghettos just down the road from the White House?

There's an added bonus, too, for Beijing: The tweet is a real turnabout on China's long, ongoing complaint that Western nations like Australia need to stop judging their human rights record by our standards.

"How do you like them apples?", Zhao's tweet all but taunts. That's why we need to be careful.

Scott Morrison was absolutely right to fire up about the issue. His description of the tweet as "repugnant" doesn't begin to plumb its raw grossness, but his statement that China should be "totally ashamed" will get him nowhere with a communist dictatorship that is entirely shameless.

Likewise, it was heartening to see Labor rise to the occasion and similarly condemn China.

But just as a small child feels power in pushing his parents' buttons and making them lose their temper, so too will Beijing delight in Australia's rage. Particularly given that Beijing has spent the last year in a spluttering temper against Australia.

That's why, if China has decided that it wants to play at the table of human rights, we should take them at their word.

This doesn't mean directing -Foreign Minister Marise Payne to wear out her thumbs tweeting abuse at Beijing.

But it does mean that we can say, fine, we are not perfect, but that we would put our human rights record up against China's any day of the week.

Here the government can calmly and rationally address the -nation and the world and say things too many people don't like to hear, despite there being clear proof for anyone who cares to look for it.

Things such as China harvests -organs. And China maintains concentration camps. And China uses slave labour. And China takes hostages.

And that China has its sights set on dominating Taiwan and the Pacific, and it will be very bad news for Australia if their plans come off.

Indeed, the consequences will be far harsher than mean tweets or more expensive consumer goods. And it's a question of pay now, or pay later.
---
Beijing's gutter social media play is provocative - and it means to be. They want to use outrage over alleged war crimes to divide our politics and society against itself

Here's a little thought experiment for you: If Chinese special forces were accused of committing war crimes overseas, do you think Beijing would investigate the matter and then issue a very public and highly embarrassing report -revealing their misdeeds for all the world to see?

Of course not.

Indeed it's tempting, given the country's behaviour from Xinjiang to Hong Kong, to say they'd probably give the troops in question a medal.

Which makes yesterday's tweet heard 'round the world all the more galling. The idea that China - China! - of all nations would suddenly decide to come across as peacenik as a bearded old crusty selling Green Left Weekly is just too much to bear.

In Yiddish, the word is chutzpah - often jokingly described as what someone has who kills their parents, then throws themselves on the mercy of the court on account of being an -orphan.

And that's about the sum of it.

Because how else can you look at a nation whose totalitarian government maintains concentration camps, uses political prisoners for slave labour, and so much besides criticising Australia for bad behaviour?

Of course no nation is perfect, but the cognitive dissonance is almost too much to bear.

The tweet in question, sent by one of China's chief "wolf warrior" diplomats, was so over the top that it is almost sure to cause a miscalculation and an over-reaction.

Coming from the account of -Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian, it read, "shocked by murder of Afghan civilians & prisoners by Australian soldiers …. we strongly condemn such acts, & call for holding them accountable".

To drive the point home, Zhao included a fake photo of an Australian soldier holding a knife to a child's throat over an Afghan flag.

Its sheer ballsiness was calculated pitch-perfectly to offend the government's honour, provoke reaction, and (this is the real trap) wedge the Australian electorate into two camps.

The aim, from Beijing's point of view, is to shift attention from Australians' increasingly bipartisan anger at their economic bullying and divide the country roughly into two camps: On the one side the China hawks, mostly on the right, who think we should keep going hard in our dealings with the CCP and give them no quarter.

And on the other, the doves, whose instincts are to think that if we've got a problem with another nation, it's probably our fault, and who tend to hold common cause with an Australian left that's happy to see anyone take the near-sacred place of Australia's military down a peg.

This faction has been increasingly in evidence as things have heated up between our two nations.

Last week commentators on the left were quick to blame the Morrison government's diplomacy, and not China's claims against Australia's sovereignty, for increased tariffs on Australian wine.

If we'd just given in, everything would be fine, is the implication. The same goes for those who say we should never have taken the lead on demanding an investigation of the origins of the COVID-19 pandemic.

You can understand how China might think they'd get what they think is a fair hearing in some quarters here.

As a strategy it's a direct echo of the old Soviet Union which, during the Cold War, sought to distract attention from its own human rights horror show by pointing to America's civil rights dramas and the plight of Blacks living in the inner city.

After all, they would ask, how can you complain about gulags when there are ghettos just down the road from the White House?

There's an added bonus, too, for Beijing: The tweet is a real turnabout on China's long, ongoing complaint that Western nations like Australia need to stop judging their human rights record by our standards.

"How do you like them apples?", Zhao's tweet all but taunts. That's why we need to be careful.

Scott Morrison was absolutely right to fire up about the issue. His description of the tweet as "repugnant" doesn't begin to plumb its raw grossness, but his statement that China should be "totally ashamed" will get him nowhere with a communist dictatorship that is entirely shameless.

Likewise, it was heartening to see Labor rise to the occasion and similarly condemn China.

But just as a small child feels power in pushing his parents' buttons and making them lose their temper, so too will Beijing delight in Australia's rage. Particularly given that Beijing has spent the last year in a spluttering temper against Australia.

That's why, if China has decided that it wants to play at the table of human rights, we should take them at their word.

This doesn't mean directing -Foreign Minister Marise Payne to wear out her thumbs tweeting abuse at Beijing.

But it does mean that we can say, fine, we are not perfect, but that we would put our human rights record up against China's any day of the week.

Here the government can calmly and rationally address the -nation and the world and say things too many people don't like to hear, despite there being clear proof for anyone who cares to look for it.

Things such as China harvests -organs. And China maintains concentration camps. And China uses slave labour. And China takes hostakes.

And that China has its sights set on dominating Taiwan and the Pacific, and it will be very bad news for Australia if their plans come off.

Indeed, the consequences will be far harsher than mean tweets or more expensive consumer goods. And it's a question of pay now, or pay later.
---
VIRUS INQUIRY POWERFUL global leaders including the UK, Russia, India and Japan are among a coalition of 62 nations supporting Australia's call for an independent inquiry into the coronavirus ahead of a vote at the World Health Assembly.

The demand for an "impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation" of the international health response to COVID-19 is expected to be the most controversial motion in a draft resolution written by the European Union, due to be put to the Assembly tomorrow morning AEST. It tasks World Health Organisation director general Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus with launching the evaluation "at the earliest appropriate moment" to review the "lessons learned" from the deadly pandemic.

Senior Federal government sources said they do not expect China to oppose the inquiry.

One source said while it will not be known for sure until the motion is called tomorrow, it is believed Beijing will have little option but to support the inquiry given the overwhelming global support for it.

"The general view is that China is unlikely to oppose but we will know when the motion is called, particularly given that Africa is now supportive of and may even co sponsor," a senior source said.

Australia was an early supporter of the draft resolution, which, in addition to having the support of the EU's 27 member states, also has the backing of 35 other countries.

At least 100 nations have indicated support for the resolution, with the US urging others to back a COVID-19 inquiry despite not being a co-sponsor of the EU's draft motion, which does not mention the origins of the coronavirus. It does, however, call on the "actions of WHO and their timelines pertaining to the COVID-19 pandemic" to be among the issues examined.

It also does not set out a specific method for an inquiry, suggesting using "existing mechanisms" for review as an option. The review would then make recommendations to "improve global pandemic prevention, preparedness, and response capacity".

Foreign Affairs Minister Marise Payne said there was "positive support" for an independent review into the pandemic to help the world "learn the lessons necessary to protect global health".

"This is about collaborating to equip the international community to better prevent or counter the next pandemic and keep our citizens safe," Ms Payne said. "Australia and a significant number of countries are co-sponsoring the EU-led resolution, which includes a call for an impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation, to be presented at this week's World Health Assembly meeting." The resolution also calls for global co-operation and collaboration to step up at "all levels" to "contain, control and mitigate the COVID-19 pandemic". It specifically highlights a need to provide people with "reliable and comprehensive information" about the coronavirus and measures being taken by authorities in response to the pandemic.

With conspiracy theories and fake miracle cures for COVID-19 increasingly spreading online, the resolution asks that countries do more to counter the "malicious cyber activities" peddling this misinformation.

WHO'S ON BOARD Albania, Australia, Bangladesh, Belarus, Bhutan, Botswana, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, El Salvador, Guatemala, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Japan, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Mozambique, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Paraguay, Peru, South Korea, Moldova, Russian Federation, San Marino, Sierra Leone, South Africa.
---
VIRUS INQUIRY POWERFUL global leaders including the UK, Russia, India and Japan are among a coalition of 62 nations supporting Australia's call for an independent inquiry into the coronavirus ahead of a vote at the World Health Assembly.

The demand for an "impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation" of the international health response to COVID-19 is expected to be the most controversial motion in a draft resolution written by the European Union, due to be put to the Assembly tomorrow morning AEST.

It tasks World Health Organisation director general Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus with launching the evaluation "at the earliest appropriate moment" to review the "lessons learned" from the deadly pandemic.

Senior Federal government sources said they do not expect China to oppose the inquiry.

One source said while it will not be known for sure until the motion is called tomorrow, it is believed Beijing will have little option but to support the inquiry given the overwhelming global support for it.

Australia was an early supporter of the draft resolution, which, in addition to having the support of the EU's 27 member states, also has the backing of 35 other countries.

The inquiry motion does not mention the origins of the coronavirus, but does call on the "actions of WHO and their timelines pertaining to the COVID-19 pandemic" to be among the issues examined.

It also does not set out a specific method for an inquiry, suggesting using "existing mechanisms" for review as an option.

The review would then make recommendations to "improve global pandemic prevention, preparedness, and response capacity".

Foreign Affairs Minister Marise Payne said there was "positive support" for an independent review into the pandemic to help the world "learn the lessons necessary to protect global health".

"This is about collaborating to equip the international community to better prevent or counter the next pandemic and keep our citizens safe," Ms Payne said. "Australia and a significant number of countries are co-sponsoring the EU-led resolution, which includes a call for an impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation, to be presented at this week's World Health Assembly meeting." The resolution also calls for global co-operation and collaboration to step up at "all levels" to "contain, control and mitigate the COVID-19 pandemic". It specifically highlights a need to provide people with "reliable and comprehensive information" about the coronavirus and measures being taken by authorities in response to the pandemic.

With conspiracy theories and fake miracle cures for COVID-19 increasingly spreading online, the resolution asks countries to counter "malicious cyber activities" peddling this misinformation.

The EU motion recognises the critical role of "extensive immunisation" against COVID-19 as a "global public good for health" once a safe, effective and affordable vaccine is available.

The draft resolution is being proposed by a host of nations, including some of the most powerful, such as Russia and the UK, as well as Australia, Japan and South Korea.

WHO'S ON BOARD Albania, Australia, Bangladesh, Belarus, Bhutan, Botswana, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, El Salvador, Guatemala, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Japan, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Mozambique, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Paraguay, Peru, South Korea, Moldova, Russian Federation, San Marino, Sierra Leone, South Africa.
---
MANU Feildel has told people to "do your own research" when it comes to his former presenting partner Pete Evans's wild claims that coronavirus is a hoax.

The French-born celebrity chef, who has long been a lone defender of Evan's paleo posturising, said he had reached out to his My Kitchen Rules mate, worried at times by his erratic social media posts and -bizarre conspiracy theories.

"As a friend, sometimes I do worry," Feildel said, "but I will pick up the phone and have a chat with him. He seems to be on top of his life, seems to be very happy and he's not worried (by the criticism)." Feildel said Evans had "his own lifestyle and his own thoughts but if he wasn't known by the public, -nobody would care. He's got his lifestyle and ways and I'm not here to criticise them." When it comes to the more dangerous health messages Evans has told his followers in recent months, including selling a $15,000 "Biocharger" that wrongly claimed to cure COVID-19, Feildel said: "It's up to you to do your own research. The same with paleo … you either follow the guy and believe it, or you don't, so don't follow him. It's as simple as that." Feildel was paired with former MasterChef judges Matt Preston and Gary Mehigan for Channel 7's new food series, Plate Of Origin, which premieres tonight.

He was also signed to star in -another season of Australia's Got Talent, now postponed because of COVID restrictions.

Preston also told today's BINGE Guide he "lost" a deal to appear on UK television, when coronavirus cruelled those plans.

"Lots of friends went from having full diaries for the next six months to having nothing, so I'm grateful for what I've got," he said. BInge: inside today
---
MEET the Wolf Warriors: Aggressive, blustering, and given to the occasional tantrum, they are the front-line soldiers in China's ever--louder propaganda war.

These are the diplomats, spokesmen and advocates tasked by Beijing with shifting blame for the regime's failure to stop COVID-19 from escaping into the world - and at the same time -convincing us, against mounting evidence to the contrary, that the Chinese Communist Party's intentions are peaceful.

Taking their name from a popular nationalist Chinese film franchise about a Rambo-like security contractor who takes on American mercenaries, the Wolf Warriors compete to outdo one -another with aggressive, bullying rhetoric - as well as a thin-skinned hypersensitivity that makes them the ultimate cry-bullies.

In other words, when it comes to the subtle art of using words to win friends and influence people, these "diplomats" are more -Eric Cartman than Henry -Kissinger.

But now with trade tensions at an all time high over demands for a coronavirus -inquiry, Beijing's wolf warriors in Australia are at the forefront of the communist regime's crumbling attempts to use "soft diplomacy" to convince the world that its -intentions are peaceful - even as their actions become ever more threatening.

And they've been firing up for some time, with diplomats even turning into Twitter trolls - ironic given that the social media platform is banned in China.

Take the case of Zhao -Lijian, who started out as a minor diplomat and won a coveted spot as spokesman for Beijing's foreign ministry.

Zhao first came to prominence in the United States last year when he responded on the mass internment and worse of China's Muslim Uig-hur population with a series of snarky tweets about racial discrimination in the US.

With coronavirus raging, Zhao made headlines again for pushing a conspiracy -theory that COVID-19 came from the US and was spread by American soldiers in Wuhan for an athletics competition last year, tweeting: "When did patient zero begin in US? How many people are infected? What are the names of the hospitals? It might be US Army who brought the epidemic to Wuhan. Be -transparent! Make public your data! US owe us an -explanation!" Needless to say, there's -little chance that Zhao was pressing that theory without approval from on high, suggesting that for China's foreign service the competition is on to see who can be the most outrageous and offensive in defence of the homeland.

And when it comes to consistency, never mind that Zhao's call suggests China is happy with anybody being -investigated over the coronavirus … except China.

Nor is it just big targets like the US who are the subject of the wolf pack's ire.

China's embassy in Sri Lanka was reportedly so bothered by a tweet by a local with just 30 followers calling the Chinese government "low class" that it fired back "Total death in #China #pandemic is 3344 till today, much -smaller than your western 'high class' governments".

In Australia, the bickering has consequences, with our exports of barley, beef, wine and other products being held up by China's war of words.

The big problem for Beijing now is that having annoyed so many other nations with their behaviour, they may soon find themselves on the end of boycotts of their own.

THE CHINA CHEERLEADERS These Australians have acted in support of China but are not necessarily wolf warriors or directly CCP-affiliated ANDREW "TWIGGY" FORREST: The billionaire mining magnate, whose Fortescue Metals Group is a major supplier of iron ore to China, has been quick to give Beijing the benefit of the doubt. Having organised for China's Victorian Consul- General to ambush a media opportunity with Health Minister Greg Hunt, Forrest has said: "I don't know if this virus started in China or somewhere else and frankly I don't care." KERRY STOKES: The Western Australian media mogul has also been keen for Australia to ratchet down its criticism of China, recently advising Scott Morrison to not "poke our biggest provider of income in the eye" with a coronavirus inquiry. Perth locals have noted the pro-China tilt in his flagship paper The West Australian, which last year ran two editorials in as many months from Beijing's local Consul-General, Dong Zhihua.

KEVIN RUDD: The former PM, apparently having gotten over being "ratf...ed" by Chinese counterparts at the 2009 climate talks, has been a big critic of Mr Morrison's efforts to build support for a coronavirus inquiry, having said earlier this month: "Australian exports find themselves unnecessarily exposed at this time through the Morrison Government not having properly diplomatically prepared this." TIM PALLAS: The Treasurer of Victoria, the only state to sign up to China's contentious Belt and Road Initiative, this week complained that China's tariffs on Australian barley were due to the way "the federal government have conducted themselves".

SHAOQUETT MOSELMANE: The state Labor MP was forced out of his role as assistant president of the NSW Legislative Council for his repeated praise of the Chinese communist regime.

MARK BUTTIGIEG: Another state Labor MP, Buttigieg tweeted earlier this month that "China is our future" and that "Australia can ill afford to maintain its historical and biased preference for China".

THE WOLF WARRIORS VICTORIAN CONSUL-GENERAL LONG ZHOU: Zhou shot to prominence when he gatecrashed a press conference by federal Health Minister Greg Hunt last month. Zhou reportedly helped to develop China's cyberspace "co-operation policy" - even as the Chinese Communist Party was engaged in hacking Western businesses and government departments.

ACADEMIC CHEN HONG: The director of the Australian Studies Centre at Shanghai's East China Normal University, Chen Hong is a leading voice trotted out by Beijing to give China's perspective, often with quotes that are as flowery as they are threatening. "Canberra is exercising despicable opportunism and is deluded in thinking it will result in geopolitical gains," Chen said recently, accusing Australian media of "spreading preposterous lies" and "sensational tales".

GLOBAL TIMES EDITOR HU XIJIN: Based in China, the boss of one of the communist regime's key mouthpieces recently threatened Australia, posting on Chinese social media platform Weibo that we are "like chewing gum stuck on the sole of China's shoes … sometimes you have to find a stone to rub it off".

CHINESE AMBASSADOR CHENG JINGYE: The leader of the Australian wolf pack, Jingye made headlines around the world when he broke longstanding diplomatic rules by leaking details of a conversation with the head of our Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. Jingye has also headed efforts to threaten Australian farmers, winemakers and universities, telling a local newspaper last month that an inquiry into coronavirus's origins would be "dangerous", adding: "It is up to the people to decide. Maybe the ordinary people will say, 'Why should we drink Australian wine? Eat Australian beef?' "

SYDNEY CONSUL-GENERAL GU XIAOJE: The local wolf warrior's "man of letters", Xiaoje is s best known for penning long responses to this newspaper and others claiming that a free press reporting on the origins of the coronavirus violates something called "the moral bottom line". In February he reportedly pushed state ministers and even university vice-chancellors to complain to Canberra about the effects of a ban on flights from China on our "international reputation". The ban has been credited with making our rate of infection one of the world's lowest.

CHINESE AMBASSADOR CHENG JINGYE: The leader of the Australian wolf pack, Jingye made headlines around the world when he broke longstanding diplomatic rules by leaking details of a conversation with the head of our Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. Jingye has also headed efforts to threaten Australian farmers, winemakers and universities, telling a local newspaper last month that an inquiry into coronavirus's origins would be "dangerous", adding: "It is up to the people to decide. Maybe the ordinary people will say, 'Why should we drink Australian wine? Eat Australian beef?' "
---
Exclusive: Freddy's boys on same flight as ref and other match officials DON'T kick the seat Freddy, referee Gerard Sutton is in front of you. In a decision that will spark conspiracy theories from Queensland, the entire NSW Blues squad will fly to Adelaide on the same plane as all nine match officials in charge of State of Origin I on Wednesday night.

'Operation Adelaide' for the Blues has taken an unprecedented turn with game one referee Sutton and video review official Steve Chiddy booked to share the same charter flight as Brad 'Freddy' Fittler's Blues.

Win, lose or draw for NSW, Sutton - who also officiated the NRL grand final last Sunday - and his team are also booked to fly back to Sydney with the Blues only hours after the historic series-opener in Adelaide.

Sutton's seat on the same flight as the NSW players, coaching staff and support team prompts immediate thoughts of what in-flight discussions may unfold if a major refereeing decision goes against Fittler's team.

Unlike other fired-up coaches who have confronted match officials after major games in the past, Fittler's laid-back nature gives NRL and NSWRL officials every confidence the coach will refrain from moving through the cabin to vent frustration over a reffing decision.

"Knowing Freddy, I wouldn't be surprised if he offered Gerard the exit aisle so he's comfortable with the extra leg room," NSWRL CEO David Trodden said.

"In all seriousness though, I know that Freddy and the entire team will show nothing but respect for the match officials, realising these unique travel arrangements are just part of the world we're living in right now." Due to the travel-bubble that both the NSW and Queensland Origin squads must adhere to, private charter flights have been booked for Wednesday night's clash with both teams set to fly in-and-out of Adelaide within 13 hours.

The COVID-19 pandemic forced the NRL to introduce charter flights for every team during last season - and on some occasions match referees have also shared the same flights.

But this will be the first time that a State of Origin team has travelled with match officials, including touch judges and standby officials.

"It's not foreign for a few of the Sydney clubs who did it this year, but for an Origin match this will be different, that's for sure," Blues team manager Peter Parr said.

The Blues hit-and-run mission to claim a valuable first-up win in Adelaide will begin with their charter flight set to depart Bankstown Airport around 10.30am on Wednesday.

They will then check-in to the Mantra Hotel in Adelaide where they can have lunch, rest and complete their preparation with a team meeting prior to boarding a bus for Adelaide Oval.

By the time they leave the ground following full-time, travel back to the airport for their return flight to Sydney and walk back into the Pullman Hotel at Sydney Olympic Park it will be 3.30am Thursday.

Interestingly, Fittler has decided to include every member of his 27-man squad on the flight to Adelaide for the series-opener. A further 21 staff, including coaching, high-performance and medical teams will also be on the flight.

Additionally, the Blues will travel with a security guard and their assigned COVID-19 officer, Mark O'Meley.

Every player and staff member will undergo a coronavirus test 48 hours before kick-off. Any player showing signs of infection will be withdrawn from the match.

OPERATION ADELAIDE ITINERARY Wednesday 10.30am - Charter flight from Bankstown Airport to Adelaide 1.30pm - Lunch & pre-game rest at Adelaide Mantra Hotel 4.30pm - Team meeting at hotel 5.30pm - Bus to Adelaide Oval 7.45pm - Kick-off Origin I 11pm - Depart Adelaide Oval Midnight - Flight from Adelaide to Bankstown Airport 3.30am - Into bed at Pullman Hotel, Sydney Olympic Park
---
STUCK ON THE COUCH? ENTERTAINMENT EXPERTS LEIGH PAATSCH, HOLLY BYRNES AND KATHY McCABE HAVE YOUR STAY-AT- HOME CHOICES COVERED

BOOKS CALM THE FARM Eleanor Oliphant Is Completely Fine by Gail Honeyman The original and best uplit book - there is a reason it's a bestseller! Eleanor has learned how to survive, but not how to live. Her life is carefully timetabled but one simple act of kindness will change everything. Not all change is bad and surely any change is better than just fine?

Parlour Games For Modern Families by Myfanwy Jones and Spiri Tsintziras. A trip down memory lane or, for some, a first-time experience, but perfect for these times: from rough and tumble to cards to wordplay, a compendium of games from yesteryear that will have the whole housebound family laughing.

ENERGY BOOST Sword Of Kings by Bernard Cornwell Sword-swinging Saxon warlord Uhtred of Bebbanburg returns in another fast-paced outing by Cornwell, Britain's king of historical fiction. The dry-witted warrior, of The Last Kingdom TV fame, is dragged into a vicious internal power struggle in a twisting plot that appeals to both male and female lovers of big characters and epic backdrops.

Grown Ups by Marian Keyes Irish fave Keyes is back with a brand-spanking-new bestseller that is joyful, sparkling and hopeful. Keyes brings her trademark wit to this taut and zeitgeisty family drama. Just what the world needs now.

CATCH UP The Wolf Hall trilogy by Hilary Mantel The compelling story of Thomas Cromwell, Cardinal Wolsey, Henry VIII and the political machinations and dangerous intrigue required for Henry's marriage to Anne Boleyn, told dazzlingly. Wolf Hall is the first in the trilogy - followed by Bring Up The Bodies and just-published The Mirror And The Light.

The Da Vinci Code by Dan BrownThe original page-turning masterpiece of a mystery thriller. The Louvre, an albino Catholic monk, the search for the Holy Grail, a Harvard professor, the Fibonacci sequence, a cryptographer, a safe-deposit box, a cryptex, a message written on papyrus, the tomb of Isaac Newton, Opus Dei and a conspiracy to hide the truth about Mary Magdalene. Have I left anything out?

NOSTALGIA TRIP The Chronicles Of Narnia by C.S. Lewis These books have enchanted millions of readers over the last fifty years and the magical events and characters have left many a lasting memory for adults and children alike. You may remember reading The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe, and there are six other books in the series to discover.

The Matilda Saga by Jackie French (left) Starting with A Waltz for Matilda, this is the story of our country, and a love song to our land, told by the strong women who forged a nation. What a treat.

PODCAST CALM THE FARM Oprah's SuperSoul Conversations The queen of unearthing the hacks to get through life compiles her interviews with thought gurus, wellness experts and spiritual advisers. These episodes are curated audio from her TV show SuperSoul Sunday and while you can tell it's ripped from video rather than an original podcast, it's still soothing to hear Oprah.

The Health Hacker with Adam MacDougall Footy legend turned "fitness economist", Adam MacDougall has all of the life experience and qualifications to cut through the myths and trends of the wellness and health industry. He focuses on practical solutions to exercise, food and mental health issues through his own research and talking to leaders in their field.

Energy Boost From The Newsdesk The fresh take on the stories of the day from news.com.au's Andrew Bucklow and Bronte Coy raced to the top of the podcast charts this month. They chat about the major headlines of the day and debunk the rumours around the big stories, from politics to pop culture.

Wilosophy with Wil Anderson The long-running chat podcast hosted by comedian and Gruen host has not only been entertaining but started many national conversations about mental health. Anderson's chats with fellow comedians have been heartwrenchingly revealing at times about their own struggles in life, and the Andy Lee episode about their long-running grudge was must-listen stuff.

Aunty Donna The Melbourne trio have been provoking belly laughs for several years with their fast-paced and often absurdist sketch comedy. COVID-19 isn't immune to their treatment with a recent EP titled Zach's Trip To Coles - The Musical. He has to go to Coles to "buy some dip".

Catch Up Life and Crimes with Andrew Rule One of Australia's most respected crime journalists, the Sunday Herald Sun columnist has been winning plenty of fans with his podcast investigating the bad guys of now and yesteryear. He has explored such infamous villains as the Granny Killer and hitman Neddy Smith and the more recent fraud trial of Melbourne racing identity Bill Vlahos.

Police Tape 1 Popular broadcaster Merrick Watts (below) hosts this addictive series where you can hear from investigating police officers, now off the force and on the record, as they talk about the cases that made their careers, have largely remained untold or simply made them cry. The first ep discusses the death of Michael Hutchence.

Police Tape 2: Blue Sirens Investigative journalist Natalie O'Brien reveals the stories of resilience and bravery of Australia's most remarkable women in law enforcement. The five-part series is compelling.

TV SHOWS CALM THE FARM BREEDERS STREAMING, FOXTEL ON DEMAND Ever considered suffocating your children with their own doonas? With schools looking likely to lock down, this could be you in a matter of days. Sleep-deprived and frazzled parents Paul (Martin Freeman) and Ally (Daisy Haggard) are all of us right now. If it's not the kids driving them nuts, it's parenting their parents, who have an opinion on everything, particularly planning of their deaths (sound familiar?). Enjoy this rib-tickling new British comedy with a glass of wine and maybe when the kids have gone to bed, so they don't see you laughing just a little too heartily at the parts where they share their darkest feelings about their beloved rug rats.

UPRIGHT STREAMING, FOXTEL ON DEMAND Lucky (Tim Minchin) and Meg (Milly Alcock) are two misfits whose lives literally collide on the Nullarbor track from Melbourne to Perth. He's a screw-up musician hauling more baggage than just the upright piano he's got in the back of the ute. She's a feisty teen runaway with her own secrets, but good luck getting close enough to find out what they are. It's a buddy dramedy that falls somewhere happily between The Shiralee and Last Cab To Darwin.

Energy Boost ZOEY'S EXTRAORDINARY PLAYLIST STREAMING, STAN A few days into working from home in "isolation", and bursting into song at my desk was the best it got by way of entertainment. If you need something a little more profesh than your own warbling, this feel-good series, which follows a perky young woman who hears other people's inner thoughts - except only in song and dance - is just the thing.

CHEER STREAMING, NETFLIX In the US of A, the competitive world of cheerleading is much more than just pompoms and cartwheels (it's that, but extra). This fascinating documentary takes you inside an elite squad and tells their stories of triumph over adversity, from the coach to the kids trying to use their one sporting chance in life.

CATCH UP SUCCESSION STREAMING, FOXTEL ON DEMAND This brilliant drama has had the world of media and Hollywood abuzz since it launched two seasons ago. It follows the lives of the fictional Roy family, who control one of the world's biggest media and entertainment conglomerates. When 80-year-old patriarch Logan Roy (Brian Cox) refuses to step down as CEO, a power struggle ensues. Who can, will or should succeed him? It's devilish and delicious drama.

CHERNOBYL STREAMING, FOXTEL ON DEMAND The idea of watching the story of one global crisis while another unfolds in real time may seem the act of a masochist. But we can always learn lessons from history, and this stunning miniseries captures the chaos and political manoeuvring that went on during the fallout from the nuclear meltdown at Chernobyl in 1986.

NOSTALGIA TRIP THE SOPRANOS STREAMING, FOXTEL ON DEMAND Late to The Sopranos party, I only recently binged this series for the first time and am now kicking myself for waiting so long. It's regarded as the real turning point in the golden era of today's TV dramas and, with the late James Gandolfini in the lead, it's an absolute must-watch.

THE WIRE STREAMING, FOXTEL ON DEMAND While Idris Elba settles in at home recovering from coronavirus, catch his breakout performance as Stringer Bell in this gritty five-season series.

MOVIES CALM THE FARM FROZEN 2 (PG) DISNEY+ Fresh from being crowned the highest-grossing animated movie of all time, Disney+ has rush-released this overpoweringly popular musical sequel to the streaming world. This proven crowd-pleaser doubles down on both the gleefully goofy antics and asides.

THE CHAPERONE (PG) AMAZON A delightful family-friendly affair (scripted by Downton Abbey creator Julian Fellowes) tracks Hollywood screen siren Louise Brooks' first steps on the road to fame and (mis)fortune during a tumultuous trip to New York.

CHARLOTTE'S WEB (G) FOXTEL, NETFLIX The touching story of an unlikely friendship between a naive young pig named Wilbur and a motherly older spider Charlotte. This beautiful live-action adaptation of the classic children's book by E. B. White goes best when there's minimum interference from the human cast. Kids under 10 will love every minute of it.

ENERGY BOOST FIGHTING WITH MY FAMILY (M) FOXTEL, iTunes This cheeky, scrappy-go-lucky affair is the true story of Saraya-Jade Bevis, a British pro wrestler who made a name for herself as the WWE star Paige. Interestingly, the movie is at its funniest and feistiest before Paige (played by Little Women's Florence Pugh) lands WWE legend Dwayne "The Rock" Johnson as a mentor.

SUZI Q (M)

GOOGLE, iTunes, YOUTUBE An engaging doco on the life of pioneering American rock star Suzi Quatro. The leather-clad icon herself is present as an open-hearted and honest contributor to her own story, as are family, friends, fans, a former husband and some ex-bandmates.

SPENSER CONFIDENTIAL (MA15+) NETFLIX One of the smarter dumb movies to come along in a while. Mark Wahlberg stars in the title role, an unconventional private investigator who used to be both a police officer and a prisoner behind bars. When his former boss is murdered, Spenser must crack the case to clear his own name as the prime suspect.

NOSTALGIA TRIP ONCE UPON A TIME IN HOLLYWOOD (MA15+) FOXTEL Some old-school Leo DiCaprio if you're itching for more of the baby-faced wonder after his brilliant display in Once Upon A Time In Hollywood. LDC plays a soldier of fortune in a compellingly confronting action pic set at the height of the 1999 civil war in the West African nation of Sierra Leone. Co-stars Jennifenseltown is captivating.

Maverick master Quentin Tarantino's love-letter to a long-lost Tinseltown is captivating.

BLOOD DIAMOND (MA15+) FOXTEL, NETFLIX Some old-school Leo DiCaprio if you're itching for more of the baby-faced wonder after his brilliant display in Once Upon A Time In Hollywood. LDC plays a soldier of fortune in a compellingly confronting action pic set at the height of the 1999 civil war in the West African nation of Sierra Leone. Co-stars Jennifer Connelly.

THE CONVERSATION (M) SBS ON DEMAND Francis Ford Coppola filmed this chilling ode to the death of personal privacy in 1974, between the masterpieces The Godfather Parts I and II. Gene Hackman is at his brilliant best as a sound surveillance expert who hears more than he should.

CATCH UP KNIVES OUT (M) GOOGLE, iTunes, YOUTUBE A cracking murder-mystery rife with loose ends, dead ends and one heck of an unseemly end. The show is stolen - and never returned - by a kookily amusing Daniel Craig (below). He plays an unorthodox private detective who knows all the answers from the get-go, but remains unsure of the question.

DANGER CLOSE: THE BATTLE OF LONG TAN (MA15+) FOXTEL, AMAZON The terrifying true story of The Battle of Long Tan during the Vietnam War, where 108 Australian soldiers had to hold their ground against a Vietcong almost twenty times in number.

MARRIAGE STORY (MA15+) NETFLIX In a manner often bordering on miraculous, this unsparing portrait of the contemporary divorce process showed us much more of a good time than anyone expected.

MUSIC CALM THE FARM Songs For Australia Julia Stone has assembled a spectacular cast of artists from around the world to cover some of Australia's most iconic songs to raise funds for the RFS, WildArk, Fire Sticks, Seed Mob and other bodies addressing climate change. Damien Rice's version of Sia's Chandelier will slay you while Stone's take on Midnight Oil's Beds Are Burning will both calm and fire you up.

Yo Yo Ma Get on social media and follow the celebrated cellist, who has launched a semi-regular #SongsOfComfort performance series. The legendary musician has chosen short classical pieces which help curb his anxiety, dedicating his rendition of the Sarabande from Bach's Cello Suite No.3 to healthcare workers on the front lines of the pandemic.

Energy Boost Monthly Mixtape by Zan Rowe The Double J legend curates my favourite updated playlist with everything new worth listening to from Australia and the world. It's perfect if you are keen for a one-stop shop of emerging artists such as Amber Mark and Sophomore to the latest releases from Tame Impala, The Strokes and Billie Eilish. Eclectic and electric.

After Hours by The Weeknd The big news when the seminal Canadian pop star released the tracklisting to his fourth album before it dropped on Friday was there were no featured artists. It appears he has reconnect with the power of one for this 14-track opus. He was clearly right to back himself, with introductory single Blinding Lights at No.1 in Australia for nine weeks.

Virtual concerts Keep your eye on your favourite artists' social media pages as many are staging impromptu live concerts as their own tours are cancelled due to the pandemic. Keith Urban, Chris Martin, John Legend, Yungblud and Pink are among the musicians who have already connected with their fans online and you can expect dozens more to join the livestream revolution.

Catch Up Festivals 2020 So now that you know you are missing out on your favourite festival with the mass gathering bans, support the artists who have lost their gigs by streaming a playlist featuring their tracks. Check out Bluesfest 2020, Groovin' The Moo 2020 and Download Festival 2020 playlists on streaming services and then head to the artists' pages to play more tunes and support them during the pandemic gig shutdown.

Albums 2020 There have been many excellent records so far this year and there's never enough time to immerse yourself in an artist's album universe. Take a mental health break and chuck on Tame Impala's The Slow Rush, Halsey's Manic, Selena Gomez's Rare, The Dangerous Age from Kate Ceberano, Steve Kilbey and Sean Sennett, Best Coast's Always Tomorrow, James Taylor's American Standard or Niall Horan's Heartbreak Weather.

Nostalgia Trip Songs From The South: Paul Kelly's Greatest Hits 1985-2019 As anyone who has ever seen this national treasure in concert can attest, Paul Kelly possesses a gentle yet persuasive power to unite people. His songs have a uniquely Australian voice and tell uniquely Australian stories and this collection of 43 songs run the gamut of his extensive repertoire. Maybe if we all played Paul Kelly at the same time, it could reignite the Australian spirit.

ZZ Top: That Little Ol' Band FromTexasZZ Top may be the only rock band whose line-up has remained the founding three members for 50 years. Their origins and evolution prove to be a fascinating and wholly original tale in this documentary, stretching right back to how three oddball teen bluesmen landed on their unique sound and look. Archival footage shows guitarist Billy Gibbons and bassist Dusty Hill without the trademark beards.

1999 by Prince (Super Deluxe) This may have slipped under your radar as it came out in late November. There was a physical box set going for $400 but you can also take the streaming route and enjoy 65 songs - the final recorded versions, demos and live cuts - when you have a spare five hours and 53 minutes.

FOR MORE LISTINGSDAiLYTELEGRAPH.com.au
---
DAMNING new information about the level of access provided by the Chinese government to WHO investigators has cast further doubt on the health body's early report into the origins of COVID-19, and is fuelling potential "conspiracy theories" about the virus that the government in Beijing has sought to squelch.

According to reports from members of the World Health Organisation's team, which last week completed a tightly controlled investigation in and around the disease's epicentre in Wuhan, Chinese -officials broke with protocol and refused to give investigators data on 174 COVID-19 cases from the early phase of the pandemic.

One of the scientists, Australian microbiologist Dominic Dwyer, told The Wall Street Journal: "They showed us a couple of examples, but that's not the same as doing all of them, which is standard epidemiological investigation." "So then, you know, the interpretation of that data becomes more limited from our point of view, although the other side might see it as being quite good," he said.

China's unwillingness to share raw data, say experts, means the job of figuring out precisely where COVID-19 originated, including whether it could have escaped accidentally during "gain-of-function" experiments at the controversial Wuhan Institute of Virology, becomes that much harder.

"Key to discovering the origins of COVID-19 is to find Patient Zero, the first human to be infected with COVID-19 virus," Flinders University vaccine developer Nikolai Petrovsky said. "The mystery is why would China seek to withhold such vital information from the committee.

"Sometimes the data you cannot obtain says more than the data you can. China withholding such important information from the panel only helps fuel the impression they have something to hide." A spokesman for federal Health Minister Greg Hunt said the government was waiting for the WHO's final report before passing judgment. "These are very complex and detailed studies which are yet to be completed, and we appreciate the efforts of the scientific experts leading this work in difficult circumstances," he said.
---
The mask is off. Following Facebook's widespread erasure of Australian pages from its platform, we now see exactly who and what we are dealing with.

Forget Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg's previously declared aims of "protecting our community from abuse and hate, defending against interference by nation states" and "making sure that time spent on Facebook is time well spent".

Replace those lofty ideals with an awareness that Facebook is a ruthless trillion-dollar entity prepared to sweep an entire nation aside if it doesn't get its way.

Invited to negotiate terms over its currently unpaid use of news content, Facebook has responded by shutting down not only news pages but also pages run by charities, government health sites, emergency services, animal rescue organisations and hospitals, among many others.

Most chillingly of all, Facebook scrubbed a domestic violence charity page run in memory of Australian Hannah Clarke and her three little children, who were doused in petrol and set alight by Ms Clarke's estranged husband exactly one year ago today.

Great timing, Facebook.

There are many parallels between Facebook's actions yesterday and China's reaction to Australian demands for an investigation into COVID-19's Wuhan origins.

China hit Australia with damaging trade barriers and tariffs. Now Facebook has hit us with indiscriminate and reckless page purges.

There is another similarity between the behaviour of China and Facebook, however, and it exposes Facebook's tactical clumsiness.

The emergence of the coronavirus and subsequent global economic disruption revealed just how dependent Western nations had become on Chinese imports and trade.

That wake-up call resonated particularly strongly in Australia, where an understanding continues to grow about the need for our nation to both find new markets and become far more self-reliant.

Likewise, Facebook's strategy reveals exactly how dependent Australians have become on a US-based social media platform that cares not at all for the welfare of Australian users.

Just as with China, Australians now know we must find other ways to connect and be informed online.

Significant opportunities now exist for multiple local developers to present their own platforms and sites. Just because Facebook is big does not mean it cannot be replaced.

"They may be changing the world," PM Scott Morrison said yesterday of monster tech companies, "but that doesn't mean they should run it." He makes a good point, and also reminds Australians of the power held by such companies.

That points to another tactical error by Facebook. The business has responded to proposed measures intended to address Facebook's excessive power by reminding everybody exactly how powerful it is.

And what a way to do it - by silencing children's charities and the like. Brilliant work, Facebook. You sure showed them who's boss.

There will be some winners out of all of this, of course.

In the absence of real news and data on Facebook, fake news, propaganda and calculated misinformation will become far more prominent.

So much for Zuckerberg's vow to make sure "time spent on Facebook is time well spent".

Instead, it will likely become a haven for conspiracy theorists and other identities currently shoved to the margins. At a time of global contagion, this is not an optimal situation. But we will emerge the better for this. Facebook may well find out that it needs our money more than we need its platform.
---
For any negotiations to be successful, a certain amount of trust must be held between the -involved parties. This is one reason why discussions -between Australia and China are so fraught. The Chinese government argues from such an absurd position that it verges on comedy.

China's Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying provided a perfect example of Chinese negotiation lunacy during a press conference this week.

"China always speaks out loud and clear and upholds justice when it comes to violations of human conscience and international fairness and justice," Hua insisted.

This is ridiculous. It is a matter of record that China conceals from its own citizens the details of atrocities such as the massacre in Tiananmen Square.

Likewise, the number of prisoners executed by China every year is a state secret.

In that light, China's opportunistic attacks on Australia over war crimes violations -appear to be no more than an -attempted distraction.

Hua called on media to "not only zoom in their lenses on human rights issues in China", but to also examine "human rights violations committed in some western countries".

No violations in western countries come anywhere near the levels of abuse that are -officially sanctioned by China's ruling communist dictatorship.

The world knows this. The Chinese dictatorship knows this. But the Chinese people, shielded by state media, do not.

Incredibly, following China's oppression of its minority Muslim Uyghur population, Hua claimed "China enjoys trad-itional friendship with the Islamic world" and is "protecting the rights of Muslim believers".

Unfortunately, no Uyghurs were available for comment due to them being held in "voluntary education and training camps".

"China has been open, transparent and responsible in origin tracing," Hua continued, add-ressing China's handling of the coronavirus crisis.

"We are among the first countries to co-operate with the World Health Organisation." That co-operation was closer to a conspiracy. The WHO's -initial response to COVID-19 was to praise Beijing, the source of significant WHO funding. The Chinese dictatorship makes it very difficult to -advance negotiations. Sadly, that may long be the case.
---
Saving one iconic ferry not enough Wow, what a waste.

Only one of the Freshwater-class Manly ferries is to retained - for weekends and public holidays (Safe harbour for old dame, 28/11).

So, in the so-called wisdom of the NSW Coalition government, they are wasting million of dollars for new faster boats - a saving of a mere eight minutes in travel time.

Why would you want to save eight minutes on one of the most beautiful harbours in the world?

And on a beautiful ferry that is part of Australian history. If it was an old fibro house it would likely be heritage listed. Glenn O'Sullivan, Kanwal

There's another side to this cut-price debate It's a funny thing when you compare consumer goods from other countries on sale in Australia - the Chinese product is nearly always cheaper (hundreds of dollars on some products) than other brands from other countries (China's whines hurting our wines, 28/11)?

Excuse my doubts, but are Chinese state-owned companies dumping product into our market? Heaven forbid that the Chinese Communist Party might even be thinking of that?

It's about time we placed our own tariffs on Chinese-made products at the same rate as inflicted on our wine industry and others.

Let's see how their quality stands up on a level playing field? I bet sales would decline dramatically.

Brad Probert, Woodlands

Big stick of cruel regime It is just pure vindictiveness that sees the Chinese government wanting to dictate a list of terms for Australia to comply with after our government wanted an inquiry into the origins of COVID -19, which started in China (China's whines hurting our wines, 28/11).

Now they are out to punish Australia with a big financial hit to our economy with bans and duties on our products.

There's a ridiculous 212 per cent tariff on our wine and 50 ships with Australian coal kept at sea and not allowed in ports to unload under the lie that our coal quality is not good.

But of course it's all about Australia calling out China's total disregard for human rights, as have many countries, but it seems we have come in for special treatment.

Now we are seeing the true face of communism in a country run by brutal despots who had no qualms about killing thousands of young students in Tiananmen Square and are now using the big stick on Australia.

Robert Livingstone, Alexandria

Licence rules' grey area The husband of a young mother who was killed after a 90-year-old drove into her has said there need to be tougher laws for elderly drivers (Get killer elderly drivers off the road, 27/11).

The young mother had been sitting with friends outside a North Epping cafe when she was struck.

There have been recent campaigns for a crackdown on the assessment of older drivers.

A major problem exists as there is no national standard when it comes to assessing the competency of aged drivers.

Victoria doesn't require drivers to pass a license test when they reach a certain age, instead the onus is on drivers to decide when they need to reduce or stop driving.

The elderly value the freedom of having a driver's licence and are very often loath to stop driving.

The need for a national standard for assessing drivers over 65 has been in the too-hard basket long enough.

Peter Penglis, Kambah, ACT

Beware more car horrors Yet another report of the death of a toddler left in a hot car (Girl dies after being left in hot car, 28/11).

I can't imagine the suffering this little one endured.

It is a timely warning to all - don't leave kids in cars. It's an Australian summer, let's not lose another precious little life.

Marg Swindells, Castle Hill

Justice suspended The Victorian County Court is sending the wrong message (Thieving union boss spared prison, 27/11).

For someone who has stolen more than $100,000 from hardworking health workers/union members not to be given a custodial sentence is just wrong.

This person has stolen money from union members and used it on trips overseas to London, Paris and the US, and paid off debts for family members while the union members performed their difficult and often unpleasant tasks. Go figure.

I wonder if I stole $100,000 from my employer, would I get a suspended sentence? Ian Field, Wagga Wagga

COVID rules roasted I attended a local club last Thursday evening for my regular "roast of the day" dinner.

I couldn't get in the door because the club had reached its one person per four square metres capacity (Cabinet's space split, 27/11).

And it will be a lot worse in the summer holidays.

The COVID police may need to attend to break up fights with frustrated holiday makers looking to spend money, but not being able to find somewhere to do so.

Jim Andrews, Ballina

Agony of the army parent I have to thank Joel Fitzgibbon for his very enlightening opinion piece about our troops (Where did it go wrong - Opinion, 27/11).

Although not in the SAS, our son served in Afghanistan and I have to say it was the longest 10 months in our lives.

Some short phone calls from him in the middle of the night were the only contact we had.

Whenever there was a press release that one of our troops had been killed our immediate thoughts and prayers were for the family of the lost soldier as we knew they had already received that "knock on the door" that no parent wants.

John Stuart, St Fillans

When the halo slips While Gladys Berejiklian has proven to be the best premier during the pandemic, her "halo" has slipped a bit in recent times.

I don't hold her dalliance with "dodgy Daryl" against her, in fact it humanises her a bit, but her recent slip-up on not quarantining following a coronavirus test, her "pork barrelling" comments and her war of words with a fellow premier show lack of judgment.

But worst of all, her government has turned "green", which was not on the voters' radar prior to last year's election.

Janice Russell, Malua Bay

Thunder enlightening Yes the Sydney Thunder vs Melbourne Stars 2020 WBBL final was anti-climatic in a way, but this should not divert attention away from what has been a riveting tournament played out by some of the most accomplished female cricketers in the world, the majority of them homegrown Australia talent.

Congratulations to the winning Sydney Thunder team and commiserations to the Melbourne Stars, who lost the final but were the best team for most of the tournament.

Eric Palm, Gympie, Queensland

Briefly … So sick of this Chinese communist dictatorship trying to make Australia another Hong Kong (China's whines hurting our wines, 28/11). Tear up the trade deal, stop all iron ore exports and let China shop elsewhere.

Dazza, Singleton "" " Good on you, James Graham. A fitting way to end a great career (Graham goes out a winner after last-gasp final drama, 29/11).

Peter Wilcox, Blayney "" " Why is it we are told to cough into our elbows, then to greet folk with an elbow tap?

Troy Henry, Long Flat "" " It fails the pub test when a small, stubborn minority of anti-vaxxers may keep the virus alive when the COVID vaccine is available (Need to deny anti-vax push - editorial, 28/11). It is a commonsense case of no one is safe until everyone is safe.

Steve Ngeow, Chatswood "" " So Joe Hildebrand reckons Albo's on the right track (Opinion, 28/11). Yeah, a dead end.

George Day, Old Bar

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
Teaching in schools of hard knocks In reference to The Saturday Telegraph's story on school violence, here are some other examples of behaviour encountered by teachers (School under siege, 14/11).

A female school principal gets punched in the face, calls police, student is arrested and taken away in handcuffs.

A pregnant teacher is pushed to the ground by a female student. When the mother is called in to discuss the girl's suspension, she says "well she didn't push her very hard".

A small female teacher tries to break up a fight between two large girls and gets squashed. She is rescued by a boy (one of many watching). When two male colleagues were asked why they didn't intervene, they said the girls would probably accuse them of inappropriate sexual touching.

I could go on with many more examples. These are just recent ones that happened to members of my own family.

Name withheld, NSW "" " In the 1950s and '60s this behaviour seldom occurred and I suggest the Education Department should go back in time and find out why.

Teachers were held in high esteem and kids would never have behaved in the way that is occurring in classrooms now.

It is high time drastic action was taken otherwise the kids are going to walk right over teachers. I am sorry teachers have to put up with this.

New directives should come from principals and the education department; it should never have been left to come this far.

It is no use leaving these sort of kids in the classroom to disrupt everybody else and hope it goes away.

J.A. Jones, Tea Gardens

An Origin win won't wipe Queensland's COVID sins The political pointscoring that Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk is attempting to achieve is simply dumbfounding (Border deal still an open question, 14/11).

Her current closed border to the majority of NSW's population smacks of a Machiavellian plot, not to mention the serious harm it's had on many people both sides of the border.

Funnily enough though, come State of Origin on Wednesday they've reviewed their gathering rules to allow full capacity at Suncorp Stadium, albeit they're restricting NSW-based supporter or commentary participation, unless isolation is taken.

Clearly Palaszczuk and her mouthpiece, chief health officer Dr Jeannette Young, have little regard for the damage they have done, and regardless of the result of Wednesday night's Origin game, Queenslanders should hang their heads in shame.

Peter Cattlin, Freshwater "" " If the Queensland government is not prepared to allow the Channel 9 commentary team of Ray Warren and others into the state for the third State of Origin, Peter V'landys and the NRL should move the game back to Sydney from Brisbane (Rabs not welcome among 50,000 rabid Queenslanders, 14/11).

See what Annastacia's reaction would be then. There is absolutely no COVID-19 or medical reason why the commentary team could not travel up and back on the day.

Paul Purcell, Soldiers Point

Slow, steady and ... safe As people complain about borders still being closed and being deprived of a sense of normality, let's not forget COVID-19 is still with us.

Looking at the northern hemisphere, which has suffered a resurgence of cases higher than that of earlier in the year, with lockdowns again being considered, we need to not let our guard down.

Victoria has shown us what can happen if poor contract tracing and insufficient testing occurs.

Even with a vaccine on the horizon promising a 90 per cent success rate, that means 2.5 million Australians could still be susceptible to getting it.

Even now testing sewage water has found traces of coronavirus and people are urged to get tested.

People that are asymptomatic, that could be carriers and spreaders without knowing it, are naively walking among us.

Our new habits of social distancing, wearing masks, hand washing for 20 seconds, using hand sanitiser and limiting numbers at venues could be with us for the foreseeable future.

There is an old saying: "Slow and steady wins the race." Let's be careful and take things a step at a time.

Joe Kovac, Prestons

Timely intervention An army of nurses sent in to heal schools is a sound, commonsense strategy indeed (Nurse army to the rescue, 15/11).

Teachers need to focus on teaching kids and these nurses will be the essential frontliners to treat and refer pupils with mental health and medical issues.

Experts stress that helping vulnerable kids at a critical early stage greatly helps to reduce their chances of them transitioning to mentally troubled adults.

Something about "a stitch in time saves nine".

Steve Ngeow, Chatswood

Fighting back on trade China has broken our "free trade agreement" by banning some of our first-class imports, therefore I propose we ban all Chinese imports (China's new slap to Australia, 14/11).

We may have to rough it for a while as everything has the label "made in China" these days.

But, who can forget those first-rate "whitegoods" Australia used to produce that never broke down or our clothing "made in Australia" that never wore out, just went out of fashion. Come on Aussie, come on.

Janice Russell, Malua Bay

Slow to realise peril Commenting on MP Joel Fitzgibbon's exit from Labor's front bench, Anna Caldwell gets it right when she says the shortsighted criticism of him by people like Mark Dreyfus and other left MPs will only further "alienate potential Labor voters who happen to agree with Fitzgibbon" (Labor throwing Fitz, 13/11).

While these left-wingers are quick to shoot off their mouth, they're a bit slow on the uptake.

Tom, Killarney Vale

Tone it down, Donald How much more conclusive evidence do Donald Trump and his obsessed supporters want after senior US federal and state officials released a statement saying there was "no evidence" that votes were lost or changed, or voting systems corrupted, and that the election turned out to be the most secure in American history.

Donald Trump's massive ego is getting in the way of him accepting defeat and his rhetoric continues to inflame tensions (MAGA march rocks US - Online, 15/11).

Unfortunately for Americans the next few months will be chaotic until Joe Biden's inauguration.

History will judge Trump very harshly if he doesn't put the country first and accept that he lost the election fair and square.

Warren Cato, Manyana

Trump just returning fire For the past four years America's Democrats have done everything in their power to demonise and destroy Donald Trump.

Now he is giving them a hell of a hard time by declaring election fraud and refusing to concede defeat and these hypocritical, unapologetic, underhanded leftists can't stand it.

What you give out in life is what you get back.

David Ingram, Randwick

Briefly ...

Nah - not a chance - that Wayne Bennett guy, he couldn't possibly have another ace up his sleeve, could he? Or could he? I get a tiny bit wary when he gives that lopsided grin - maybe it's because his eyes ain't smiling (Origin 2020, 15/11).

Rosemary O'Brien, Ashfield "" " With the constant stream of failed relationships on reality romance shows it's nice to see Anna Heinrich and Tim Robards, who have been together since 2013, welcome daughter Elle into the world ('Bloody amazing!': Bachelor baby is now a reality, 15/11). Congratulations.

Marg Swindells, Castle Hill

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
NRL 360 host PAUL KENT revisits his fearless predictions counting down to the 2020 season reboot

EELS BRAD Arthur has assembled himself a formidable team this year and now, with a dream draw, the Eels are poised to make a comfortable run into the top four. They retain their home ground and play many "away" games at home, too. The Eels play twice only Manly and Brisbane from last year's top eight.

Inside the club, Reagan Campbell-Gillard and Ryan Matterson finish off the team list nicely. Campbell-Gillard is a State of Origin-calibre prop and the Eels got him for a song, while the younger Matterson is a strong chance to push his way into the Blues' squad this season. Around that the Eels' pack is tough. Add the raw power Maika Sivo and Blake Ferguson bring to the edges, combined with Waqa Blake and Michael Jennings, will terrify the opposition. Then you add Clint Gutherson, Mitch Moses and the game's rising star, Dylan Edwards. If Moses can continue to improve and be more consistent, the Blue and Gold Army is in for a ride.

Prediction: 1st (3rd pre-COVID-19)

STORM YOU can't help but be full of admiration for the way Melbourne manage to be competitive season after season. Cameron Smith again remains the key and, so long as he is on the field, Melbourne are always a chance to do something great. Halfback remains a key position and again it looks like coach Craig Bellamy will take a cautious approach. Jahrome Hughes seems set to get first crack but Ryley Jacks and, later in the season, Cooper Johns will compete for the role. The blessing is they will play behind a powerful pack. The worry for Melbourne is a tough draw, playing four of last year's top eight twice, with the other team they play twice the improved Newcastle.

Prediction: 2nd (4th pre-COVID-19)

RAIDERS THE Raiders have the worst home ground advantage of any club, and will work under the worst possible conditions of any of the 16 NRL clubs. They having to bus nearly three hours to every "home" game, or fly, and then return that night making recovery challenging. It might begin to tell as the season goes deep. There were good signs in how they began the season, though. George Williams is a solid recruitment and was highly impressive in the opening two games, fitting quickly into his role. Like Josh Hodgson, will run the team, he could be a better signing than many anticipated and he will love the new six again rule.

Prediction: 3rd (2nd pre-COVID-19)

ROOSTERS THE Roosters have the challenge ahead they might need. Forget about three in a row. They have a tough draw, playing four of last year's top eight twice, and must come from a winless opening to the season. The battle for the Roosters will be to give the start they have and make the top four, all in a shortened season. Still, the Roosters have done a magnificent job assembling this roster and nothing has changed there. The premiers have lost Cooper Cronk and Latrell Mitchell but still have the strongest talent pool in the competition. Kyle Flanagan comes in at halfback, Josh Morris is a shrewd buy, while James Tedesco is the best player in the competition and still has improvement in him, as does Luke Keary at No.6.

Prediction: 4th (1st pre-COVID-19)

SEA EAGLES DES Hasler did a tremendous job last year to take the completely overlooked Sea Eagles to the finals and they started this season just as impressively. So don't expect anything to be different this season. Hasler realised his pack was as good as any - Marty Taupau and Addin Fonua-Blake are two of the best yardage props in the game and unheralded edge forwards. Then you add Jake Trbojevic as the third middle forward. With Daly Cherry-Evans and Tom Trbojevic creating opportunities in the backs, the Sea Eagles are in a good place. Hasler has re-energised the club. The players are fit and enthusiastic, which creates its own energy inside the club confines. The big concern is the lack of a recognised dummy-half.

Prediction: 5th (5th pre-COVID-19)

PANTHERS THE Panthers looked strong in their opening two games but have had a few hiccups during isolation. It remains to be seen how it affects them, keeping in mind how problems during last year's pre-season created a hangover coach Ivan Cleary later admitted they struggled to recover from. The Panthers seemed strong in their opening two games, with Nathan Cleary particularly impressive. With James Maloney no longer there to lead the team Cleary seamlessly stepped into the role and showed he was the leader many believed he was capable of becoming. If they get it right they have the potential to go deep. Api Koroisau is a good foil and there is good depth in the forwards.

Prediction: 6th (7th pre-COVID-19)

RABBITOHS LITTLE has changed in the Rabbitohs' brief since COVID-19 - I'm still not sure about the Rabbitohs this season. They have possibly the best spine in the competition - and Latrell Mitchell, Cody Walker, Adam Reynolds and Damien Cook are certain to drive many wins - and many are expecting the new six-again rule to benefit nobody more than it will Cook. But already the Bunnies have lost James Roberts for an undetermined period while pressure remains on Mitchell. He failed to finish his opening two games at fullback and coach Wayne Bennett has insisted Mitchell will start at fullback when the comp resumes but, tellingly, Bennett did not say how many minutes he would play there. Souths teammates have been impressed with his efforts since he returned to training, which is a good sign.

Prediction: 7th (6th pre-COVID-19)

BRONCOS THE Broncos started impressively and sparked a lot of hope for their fans. The big question for Brisbane: can they win the premiership with a halfback who the Storm thought was incapable of winning them a premiership? Showing good signs early, Brodie Croft proved himself a highly suitable role player in the Broncos system, and benefited playing behind the most exciting forward pack in the competition. David Fifita and Payne Haas both began strongly and the time off has helped Matt Lodge.

Prediction: 8th (10th pre-COVID-19)

KNIGHTS ADAM O'Brien is a quality signing for the Knights and saw in their opening two games how much of a difference he has made. The Knights look almost a different side defensively. How Newcastle navigate through the new ruck interpretations could be crucial to their season. It's still all a learning process for the Knights, making O'Brien the perfect appointment. There's a bright crop of young players coming through and a handy group of young and talented NRL players about to make the transition into quality, seasoned rep players. Most notably Kalyn Ponga, who will benefit enormously from O'Brien's arrival.

Prediction: 9th (8th pre-COVID-19)

SHARKS I'M worried about the Sharks. Andrew Fifita had knee troubles most of the summer which threatened to limit his season and which have already impacted, again, on his enforced rest from COVID-19. Fifita came back underdone, highlighting the concern the Sharks have for their big prop. There are also concerns over whether Matt Moylan is in good enough shape to play 80 minutes at fullback after battling a hamstring issue during pre-season, but the break has done him good. The break, combined with Josh Morris's release, has also seen Josh Dugan return from his weird place and hopefully ready to fire. Welcome back, Josh.

Prediction: 10th (11th pre-COVID-19)

WESTS TIGERS I LIKED everything I heard out of the Tigers over the summer but the round-two defeat to Newcastle was disappointing. It was the kind of loss coach Michael Maguire cannot tolerate, a team that lost its shape and lost resilience. I still believe the Tigers will be tough and competitive and in better shape than most of their opponents but the concern remains the roster. Hiccups in recruitment have meant the only big signing is the erratic Joey Leilua, who generally wins the game for you or loses it. Ryan Matterson is a big loss, and Robbie Farah has retired. If anything, the COVID-19 break has given Luke Brooks time to recover from injury and now he won't miss anywhere near as many games as he was going to.

Prediction 11th (13th pre-COVID-19)

COWBOYS VALENTINE Holmes was everything the Cowboys hoped for since arriving in Townsville; a strong trainer, the complete professional, and the touch of quality to ignite their attack. But his opening two games showed it will be some time before he is at the same level of form he was in the NRL when he left. The Cowboys were disappointing against Brisbane and unimpressive beating Canterbury. They got a boost with the new draw, not having to play any of last year's top four teams more than once. They also get to play at home, which will become a valuable asset for those teams who can.

Prediction: 12th (9th pre-COVID-19)

BULLDOGS THE big news for Bulldogs fans is the COVID-19 delay has allowed time for Kieran Foran to recover from shoulder surgery and, if not available for the Dogs' first game, it won't be long. In this way, no team has benefited from the suspended competition like the Bulldogs. Having said that, the work is still ahead of them. It was troubling to rank the Bulldogs so low based on what Dean Pay is doing at the club, and in light of last year's finish to the season with seven wins from their final 10 games. But the Dogs are still restricted by salary cap troubles and it will be several seasons yet before they are in a position to recruit their way up the ladder. However, they are buying in to Pay's coaching, as evidenced by last year's finish, and there is an expectation the Bulldogs will improve again this season. It might not always show up in the results but, certainly, the performance. Canterbury's biggest problem is the young age of their spine. By NRL standards, those players are still learning the game.

Prediction: 13th (14th pre-COVID-19)

WARRIORS THE Warriors have suffered several worrying injuries to their middle forwards during their isolation camp. So much, a quiet SOS has gone out throughout the league given isolation laws have made it tough to replace them. By basing themselves in Australia, unable to return home, the Warriors will do it tougher than any Australian-based NRL team and the trick will be how they accept it. They could turn the camp atmosphere into a call to arms or they could slowly become homesick and disinterested. Attitude has always been the club's problem in seasons gone by, but this time it is for different reasons.

Prediction: 14th (15th pre-COVID-19)

DRAGONS THE Dragons were extremely disappointing in their opening two games. Both were winnable and, in a worrying reflection of the team, they found a way to lose both. I expected immediate improvement from the Dragons but saw little of it. Based on the opening games, their defence is the worst in the NRL. I thought Shane Flanagan's appointment as an assistant and his ability to get the entire team buying in to a defensive system would provide immediate benefit. The lack of it shows how much work still must be done. Beyond that, the Dragons' biggest worry is their strength in the outside backs and their ability to score points. They will improve, but it will come too late in the season to make the playoffs.

Prediction: 15th (12th pre-COVID-19)

TITANS ASH Taylor's return to the Titans this year, and the positive vibes coming from him, are a strong sign for the Titans, and he seemed to be in good shape in the Titans' opening two games. Already we have seen new coach Justin Holbrook's effect on the club. Over the summer he broke the Titans down to bare essentials before trying to rebuild their game and the first two games seemed to reveal a more structured, more solid and trustworthy Gold Coast outfit. It's what needs to be done but they also need a plan that is built on patience. Holbrook's next job is to get a few of those highly paid players to begin justifying their price tags. Prediction: 16th (16th pre-COVID-19)
---
Let's Cook up interest in history It shouldn't come as a surprise that young people get Captain James Cook mixed up with Captain Arthur Phillip, thinking he was part of the First Fleet (Lasting impact of a brief encounter, 29/4).

Even a former National Party deputy leader Bridget McKenzie once stated while in support of Australia Day remaining as a holiday on January 26 that it was the day Cook landed in Australia.

If senior political leaders don't know this important aspect of our history we have a problem, whereby we are possibly not concentrating enough on Australian history.

As someone from a Greek background, Kurnell, the landing place of Captain Cook was the location where many Greek immigrant families during the 1960s and 70s spent Australia Day having picnics and acknowledging the importance of Cook.

Con Vaitsas, Ashbury

"" " Congratulations to The Daily Telegraph for its coverage of the James Cook anniversary (Lasting impact of a brief encounter, 29/4).

We can learn a lot from history. Remember, we can't change it. Let's not forget that being the first European to sight the east coast of Australia was like us now going into space.

Cook's ship the Endeavour was damaged on the Great Barrier Reef and if it had not made it back to England, Australia would have a completely different history.

In 1970, with no COVID-19 hysteria, the Cook anniversary was a big deal. Joe Kovac, Prestons

Doco gives left leaners plenty Moore to digest After reading Miranda Devine's opinion article (For the Greenies, less is Michael Moore, 29/4), I took time out in isolation to look at Planet Of The Humans on YouTube. It was the best 100 minutes I have spent in a long time.

I would urge all Australians to look at this film, especially those Australians and politicians who are suggesting our nation should adopt a 100 per cent renewable energy scheme.

It exposes this green con and the billionaires who will derive financial gains if green energy is adopted.

For the first time the left-wing has shown some transparency on this subject. If Mike Moore was a Pom he would be knighted.

Bruce Rollo, Wollongbar

Powering up electric cars The criticism of the electric car industry in Michael Moore's new documentary is quite surprising (For the Greenies, less is Michael Moore - Miranda Devine, 29/4).

Sure, battery-powered cars are only as clean as the source of electricity they use.

Of course, if they were introduced 20 years ago, their effective carbon emissions would have been indistinguishable from internal-combustion engine cars.

However, with the fast improvement in solar and wind-energy technology, 20 years from now electric cars will realistically allow for widespread, cheap, low-emission private transport.

This is not to mention the fact that electric vehicles will make Australia independent from the need for oil importation. The technology seems like something worth working on.

Simone Belli, Wollstonecraft

Water we waiting for?

It was great to see a list of the projects to get the NSW economy back on track (On a fast track to rebuilding our state, 29/4).

But I failed to see one particular item - there was no mention of dams or water harvesting.

Maybe that's because water is a country issue and not a Sydney one - and not a worry now until the next drought.

Colin Bailey, Heathcote

Wisdom of kid with a smile We seem to all be bemoaning the fact we have to stay in our homes and we can't go to the beach or we are holed up in four star hotels while we come to grips with defeating this pandemic.

Then in contrast to all this doom and gloom, we turn to Page 15 of The Daily Telegraph on Monday and this little chap leaps off the page and into our hearts, more concerned about his mum than the pain and suffering he has endured (Smile that's star quality, 29/4).

We all should learn from six-year-old cancer survivor Chase Green and stop the finger pointing and blame game.

As country legend Tom T Hall says in that great song, "God bless little children while they're still too young to hate".

Don Rodgers, Warragai Creek

Future needs funding now We have $162 billion in the nation's Future Fund. The object of this fund is to strengthen the nation's long-term financial position. This is taxpayers' money stored up for some mythical future. Indeed, it is a worthy cause but the future has arrived with a bang and it is grim.

There is no better time to invest this money in infrastructure projects that will employ people and benefit the nation for decades to come.

Ray Armstrong, Tweed Heads South

Evacuate fatal facility Australian hearts must surely be going out to relatives of the 11 elderly residents of the Newmarch House nursing home near Penrith, who have died from the coronavirus pandemic sweeping much of the world.

Surely this establishment, which has seemingly become a death trap, should be evacuated ASAP before more families get the bad news that one of their cherished relatives has succumbed to the coronavirus.

Eric Palm, Gympie, Qld

Letting down the side The NRL's failure to adequately punish their errant players has let down the general public, the returned soldiers who couldn't march on Anzac Day, those elderly citizens who can't see their families, those who cannot give a loved one a proper funeral, those 18 and 21-year-olds who cannot have a proper birthday party celebration and the medical staff who take care of everyone (Big fines for guns & posers, 29/4).

Finally, they have let down the people who support and love the game of rugby league who have seen that support being trivialised by certain players who couldn't care less about their fellow citizens.

Peter Wilcox, Blayney

Dealing with a global brat I fully agree with your editorial piece (China turns off the charm, 29/4). The Chinese regime seems to be behaving like a spoiled brat caught with his hand in the coronavirus cookie jar.

The threat from the Chinese ambassador to boycott trade with Australia over the proposed independent inquiry into the origins of the coronavirus crisis strongly suggests China has something serious to hide.

China appears to have adopted the same almost paranoiac attitude that it shows when human rights officials seek to investigate the treatment of Tibetans, whose country was taken over forcefully, or the Uighur people, who have been rounded up and confined to "re-education" camps.

President Xi must be convinced by the West that the path he is taking will lead only to great harm on both sides of the battle.

Douglas Mackenzie, Deakin, ACT

Briefly … Miranda Devine and James Morrow have hit the nail on the head (opinion columns, 29/4). The Chinese Communist Party (CPP) have demonstrated they are simply nasty bullies. It's time for Australia to take back those parts of our country we have stupidly allowed to be sold off or long-term leased to disguised entities which are simply fronts for the CPP.

Peter Cattlin, Freshwater "" " The Roosters copped a fair bit of flak for letting go of Latrell Mitchell but it has become obvious they were well ahead of the critics. Good luck to the Rabbits.

Mick Evans, Park Ridge, Qld "" " After talking tough, the NRL has let Latrell Mitchell and Josh Addo-Carr off with a fine of a fraction of their earnings. They should have been banned for the rest of the year.

Brian Whybrow, Wanniassa, ACT

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily TelegraphGPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
Australia leads calls for global inquiry into 'cover-up' BLAME GAME

CHINA'S secrecy and early attempts to downplay the coronavirus outbreak would be scrutinised in an independent global inquiry into the pandemic demanded by Australia.

The Morrison government is leading the international call for an independent review of the COVID-19 crisis to determine the origin of the virus and if more could have been done to slow its spread.

Foreign Minister Marise Payne (inset) said transparency - particularly from the Chinese government - would be "key" to any review.

"An independent review would identify for us (facts) about the genesis of the virus, about the approaches to dealing with it, and addressing it about the openness with which information was shared," she said.

"(And) about interaction with the World Health Organisation … with other international leaders.

"All of those sorts of things will need to be on the table." Ms Payne said every country would need to agree to a mechanism for the review, but argued it should not be done by the WHO as its own activities would likely be assessed.

"We've been able to do those sorts of things in the past for key independent reviews, often on egregious human rights issues, for example," she said.

"But it will need parties and countries to come to the table with a willingness to be transparent and to engage in that process, and also ensure that we have a review mechanism in which the international community can have faith." On Friday China revised its death toll for the city of Wuhan - ground zero of the outbreak - to 3869 fatalities, almost 50 per cent higher than previously reported. According to Chinese state media, these deaths were missed by local officials in Wuhan -because the city's medical facilities were overwhelmed.

Health Minister Greg Hunt said the federal government had confidence in Australia's coronavirus numbers.

"Australia's own figures have been identified by the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine as the most accurate of 83 countries around the world," he said.

China has been criticised for being slow to publicly -announce it had detected clusters of pneumonia cases with no known source in December 2019, preventing health officials from sounding the alarm at the time.

Labor's health spokesman Chris Bowen said the Opposition backed an independent review and as Australia's top diplomat Ms Payne must work to make it a "reality".

How China let down the world SLOW TO CONFIRM VIRUS ■ Chinese authorities only announced cases of pneumonia of an unknown cause on December 31, but the first cluster of patients had been identified on December 21.

■ On January 23, Wuhan was cut off by Chinese authorities, but at least 100,000 people had already left the city via trains.

HEALTH STAFF GAGGED ■ Central Hospital of Wuhan banned staff from discussing the disease. ■ Chinese doctor Dr Li Wenliang allegedly forced to retract his warning. He died from COVID-19.

REPORTERS DENIED ACCESS ■ Hong Kong reporters detained trying to film Wuhan hospital. HOARDED MEDICAL SUPPLIES ■ Chinese companies ordered to source PPE and other medical supplies in early January.

WET MARKETS CONTINUE ■ In February, China said it was reviewing its trade and consumption of wildlife, but later allowed wet markets to reopen.

INFECTION AND DEATH RATES LACK TRANSPARENCY ■ China not counting asymptomatic cases or overseas arrivals. ■ China increased its Wuhan death rate by 50 per cent in one day. COVID-19 EQUIPMENT FAULTY■ Australian Border Force seized 800,000 PPE products imported privately from China that weren't up to standard.
---
Tighten the belt and secure footy's future

THE NRL's financial position is no longer catastrophic.

A soon-to-be-signed seven-year, $2.3 billion TV broadcast deal is the richest in Australia's sporting history and gives the NRL a wonderful foundation to safeguard its future.

The game now needs a seven-year strategic plan, driven and delivered by Peter V'landys, and long-term investment must be the number one priority.

Combine the annual $330 million payment from Channel 9 and Fox Sports with another $200 million in non--broadcast revenue and the game has a solid base.

The clubs get $206 million (16 x $13 million grants), which takes care of player payments and leaves each franchise $3 million in change before sponsorship, membership, ticket sales, merchandise and leagues club grants. That leaves $324 million for the NRL each year. And this is what needs to happen.

SALARIES Cost-cutting will start right at the top and the next CEO will be on lower than $1 -million.

Recently departed chief executive Todd Greenberg was on $1.2 million plus big bonuses. It was recently revealed the NRL spends $500,000 a day to run the competition with a staff of 400.

V'landys has vowed to slash $50 million a year from these costs. Executive wages have been out of control for too long. The game's senior management team is on a combined $6 million.

The likes of second-in-charge Nick Weeks will no longer be on $900,000.

CLUBS Poker machine revenue is slowly dying and Sydney teams can no longer rely on their licensed clubs. Still, the NRL must not give the clubs more money. It's like drip-feeding cash to a drunk punter.

These clubs have lost and squandered more than $400 million over the past 10 years. We reported recently how the money has been wasted on dozens of coach sackings, overstaffing of football departments, player contract payouts and salary cap scandals.

Like the NRL head office, the clubs need to spend more responsibly and set up sustainable business models.

FOOTBALL DEPARTMENTS Salaries for coaches and their high--performance staff will be substantially reduced. The days of Craig Bellamy and Wayne Bennett getting $1.5 million are numbered. It is simply unaffordable.

Some clubs are now spending up to $8 million to prepare their teams. The NRL will impose a cap of around $4.5 million on football departments.

There will be two assistant coaches instead of three, one less physio and one less in sports science. The extravagance of having full-time dietitians, psychologists and two doctors will go.

PLAYER PAYMENTS Goodbye to Ben Hunt, Ash Taylor, Josh Dugan, Kieran Foran and Anthony Milford-type contracts. The salary cap is now $9.6 million and the RLPA will fight hard for increases each year.

However, there is talk that players will have to take a hit like everyone else. One official told me the cap could come down to as low as $8.5 million next year while the game, like all businesses, slowly recovers from COVID-19. It would require an across-the-board pay cut of 11 per cent.

GRASSROOTS To save money, the responsibility for junior development needs to be taken from the clubs. In some cases, like at the Penrith Panthers, it will save them several million dollars annually.

In the past the NRL, NSWRL and clubs have all employed development -officers in schools and junior league.

Ridiculously, representatives from all three bodies have been covering the same areas. Clubs will be reluctant to lose control of their own juniors but it is the most cost-effective outcome.

In future, this should all be handled by the NSWRL and QRL. All juniors will belong to the game, not the individual clubs.

REFEREES AND BUNKER The NRL employs 25 full-time referees and touch judges.

The Project Apollo committee has -already determined the game will resume on May 28 with only one referee. The full-time squad could drop to as low as a dozen.

There are many cost-saving opportunities for the bunker, including combining operations with other football codes such as the AFL, rugby union and soccer to share the same technology from the same facility. It could save $2 million a year.

INTEGRITY UNIT The integrity unit employs 17 investigators, legal experts and betting analysts. This is another area where cost savings could be significant. Like with the operation of the -bunker, there is talk of setting up a statewide sporting integrity unit to be in charge of all sports in NSW, including cricket, the football codes, boxing or any events on which bookmakers frame markets.

INDEPENDENT COMMISSION Now is the time for a shake-up. To ensure transparency, the 16 clubs should have two representatives on the commission.

There would be no more secrets over finances. Only COVID-19 uncovered the mess we've been in.

Also, the QRL and NSWRL should each have a representative at the table now they have taken full responsibility for grassroots.

STADIUM POLICY The NRL has to finalise a policy on venues and take it to the state government. Maybe even buy or invest in a stadium like Bankwest.

Greenberg always favoured the big stadium rebuilds at Allianz and ANZ, which is fine for Origin, grand finals and blockbusters.

But V'landys is in favour of suburban-ground tribalism, as are the broadcasters, which loathe having a backdrop of tens of thousands of empty seats in a stadium.

The nine Sydney clubs can only survive long term if several of the venues, such as Brookvale Oval, Shark Park, Leichhardt Oval, Campbelltown, Kogarah and Penrith, are upgraded into boutique stadiums or mini Bankwest Stadiums.

INVESTMENT The NRL right now owns nothing.

It recently obtained a $250 million line of credit from UK financiers as an emergency backstop to fight the crippling effect of COVID-19.

V'landys wants to build a war chest. The aim is to bank or invest $70 million a year.That would leave more than half a billion dollars in the bank by the time this next broadcast deal expires in 2027. And it would set the game up for the next 50 years.
---
CHINA CASHING IN ON VIRUS: ENVOY THE Chinese government has created a global pandemic through their "gross negligence, obsessive secrecy and brazen dishonesty" - and is now using it to advance their interest in our region, the United States ambassador to Australia says.

Condemning China over its culpability in the spread of COVID-19, Ambassador Arthur B. Culvahouse described President Xi Jinping's communist regime as "bullies" who were trying to destabilise our region with a "shocking new vigour" while the rest of the world dealt with the health and economic consequences of the coronavirus.

Mr Culvahouse, nominated US ambassador to Australia by United States President Donald Trump in late 2018, said that China was taking full advantage of the pandemic to assert itself in a fashion typical of the -Chinese Communist Party "playbook".

"What Foreign Minister Marise Payne rightly referred to as destabilising activities are hardly new tactics from the CCP playbook, but they are being pursued with shocking new vigour as the rest of the world is focused on combating the COVID-19 pandemic, one which the CCP - through gross negligence, obsessive secrecy and brazen dishonesty - first covered up while exporting it to the world," he said.

"Sadly, in this playbook creating a global pandemic is treated as one more opportunity to advance geo--strategic objectives." Mr Culvahouse made the remarks in an article he wrote on the "unbreakable" Australia and United States alliance, published on a government and defence website Defence Connect.

His comments follow Ms Payne's criticism of China for reportedly sinking a Vietnamese fishing boat and stepping up other "destabilising activities" in the South China Sea.

In his opinion piece, Mr Culvahouse asserts that the "unbreakable alliance" between the US and Australia is essential while the CCP has "aggressively deployed its navy, coastguard and maritime militia across the South China Sea, seeking to advance a spurious claim of sole proprietorship over this massive international waterway".

"Having only recently sunk a Vietnamese fishing boat and locked naval weapon systems on a Philippine ship, it is even now in the midst of another outrageous confrontation over oil and gas rights within Malaysia's exclusive economic zone." Mr Culvahouse described the manoeuvres as "Beijing's heavy-handed attempts to unlawfully impose its territorial claims on the rest of the region".

"To counter this, three US Navy warships were joined by Australia's HMAS Parramatta for a series of important bilateral exercises in the South China Sea," he said.

"This activity was an important demonstration that the US and Australia will continue to stand strong together for our timeless values and mutually beneficial interests." While China continued to take advantage of the coronavirus pandemic, Mr Culvahouse said he did not believe the "bullies" would win.

"This is why I believe we will ultimately prevail, because bullies don't have partners, and they certainly don't have friends who come close to matching the durable, comprehensive, and integrated quality of the Unbreakable Alliance between the United States and Australia," he said.

"For the sake of all who value open commerce and the rule of law, we shall not go gentle into that good night." The United States has supported Australia's call for an independent inquiry into the origins and outbreak of COVID-19, with the resolution on it going to the World Health Assembly on Monday where a consensus will be sought on the matter.

China has relentlessly attacked Australia for proposing an inquiry, with its ambassador in Canberra last month threatening a boycott of Australian trade.

US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo has criticised China's economic retaliation against Australia following the call for an inquiry.

"Who in the world wouldn't want an investigation of how this happened to the world? We would urge every country, all of our partners, to demand that we get answers for what happened here, but also that we ... get the transparency, that the world gets the transparency it needs," Mr Pompeo said last month.

Mr Culvahouse, who has been in Australia for just over a year, serves as the President's personal representative to the government and people of Australia. In the piece, he writes that Australia and the United States share the same view of the world and have the same values.
---
CHINA CASHING IN ON VIRUS: ENVOY

THE Chinese government has created a global pandemic through their "gross negligence, obsessive secrecy and brazen dishonesty" and is now using it to advance their interest in our region, the United States Ambassador to Australia says.

Condemning China over its culpability in the spread of COVID-19, Ambassador Arthur B. Culvahouse described China's communist regime as "bullies" who were trying to destabilise our region with a "shocking new vigour" while the rest of the world dealt with the health and economic consequences of the coronavirus.

Mr Culvahouse, nominated US Ambassador to Australia by United States President Donald Trump in late 2018, said that China was taking full advantage of the pandemic to assert itself in a fashion typical of the -Chinese Communist Party "playbook".

"What Foreign Minister Marise Payne rightly referred to as destabilising activities are hardly new tactics from the CCP playbook, but they are being pursued with shocking new vigour as the rest of the world is focused on combating the COVID-19 pandemic, one which the CCP - through gross negligence, obsessive secrecy, and brazen dishonesty - first covered up while exporting it to the world," he said.

"Sadly, in this playbook creating a global pandemic is treated as one more opportunity to advance geo-strategic objectives." Mr Culvahouse made the remarks in an article he wrote on the "unbreakable" Australia and United States alliance, published on a government and defence website Defence Connect.

His comments follow Foreign Minister Marise Payne's criticism of China for reportedly sinking a Vietnamese fishing boat and stepping up other "destabilising activities" in the South China Sea.

In his opinion piece, Mr Culvahouse asserts that the "unbreakable alliance" between the US and Australia is essential while the CCP has "aggressively deployed its navy, coast guard and maritime militia across the South China Sea, seeking to advance a spurious claim of sole proprietorship over this massive international waterway".

"Having only recently sunk a Vietnamese fishing boat and locked naval weapon systems on a Philippine ship, it is even now in the midst of another outrageous confrontation over oil and gas rights within Malaysia's exclusive economic zone." Mr Culvahouse described the manoeuvres as "Beijing's heavy-handed attempts to unlawfully impose its territorial claims on the rest of the region".

"To counter this, three US Navy warships were joined by Australia's HMAS Parramatta for a series of important bilateral exercises in the South China Sea," he said.

"This activity was an important demonstration that the US and Australia will continue to stand strong together for our timeless values and mutually beneficial interests." While China continued to take advantage of the coronavirus pandemic, Mr Culvahouse said he did not believe the "bullies" would win.

"This is why I believe we will ultimately prevail, because bullies don't have partners, and they certainly don't have friends who come close to matching the durable, comprehensive, and integrated quality of the Unbreakable Alliance between the United States and Australia," he said.

"For the sake of all who value open commerce and the rule of law, we shall not go gentle into that good night." The United States has supported Australia's call for an independent inquiry into the origins and outbreak of COVID-19 by China, with the resolution on it going to the World Health Assembly on Monday where a consensus will be sought on the matter.

China has relentlessly attacked Australia for proposing an inquiry, with its Ambassador in Canberra last month threatening a boycott of Australian trade.

US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo has criticised China's economic retaliation against Australia following the call for an inquiry.

"Who in the world wouldn't want an investigation of how this happened to the world? We would urge every country, all of our partners, to demand that we get answers for what happened here, but also that we continue to have - we get the transparency, that the world gets the transparency it needs," Mr Pompeo said last month.

Mr Culvahouse, who has been in Australia for just over a year, serves as the President's personal representative to the government and people of Australia.In the piece, he writes that Australia and the United States share the same view of the world and values.
---
I am not a China basher and think that a lot of the flak that gets directed to our most powerful Asian neighbour often stems from fears and suspicions that are -rooted in prejudice. The modern-day economic success of Australia has been inextricably linked to the economic growth of China.

The balance is skewed heavily in our favour, too, with the -Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade recording that in 2018-19 Australian exported $134 billion in goods and services to China and imported just $78 -billion. But the growing tensions between Beijing and Canberra over our government's support for an independent inquiry into the origin and management of COVID-19 in China's Hubei province should serve as a reminder of an important truth.  Australia is a democracy, China is not. Australia values transparency. China does not.

And some things matter more than money - especially a pandemic that has killed more than 200,000 worldwide.

The manner in which Beijing has responded to the very suggestion of an inquiry says a fair bit about the political character of the nation. The way China is behaving right now is nothing short of a disgrace. It is eminently possible that China is responsible for destroying Australian lives and much of the Australian economy on account of its handling of the coronavirus outbreak, and now audaciously threatens to do us more harm as a result of us supporting an independent inquiry into how this pandemic started.

If ever you needed a demonstration of the political values guiding our two countries, this is it. China's diplomats have engaged in the opposite of diplomacy when it comes to the mooted coronavirus inquest, opting instead to bully us with dark threats our beef industry and the wine industry will be targeted if Australia "singles out" China for scrutiny.

The idea of "singling out" China is a bizarre one. No one is "singling out" China for any other reason than the virus actually originated there, in circumstances that deserve thorough and independent scrutiny.

There is a real risk that China might find itself isolated as a -result of its actions if it continues to behave in its current belligerent fashion. Chinese ambassador to Australia Cheng Jingye has massively overplayed his hand by threatening retaliation.

It is offensive and tasteless stand-over stuff that does him or his nation no benefit. Cheng is not alone, either. There have been instances this past month in Brazil, Iran, Singapore and in a number of European countries where Chinese diplomats have been acting like a bunch of Twitter trolls, bagging their host nations for having the temerity to question China's management of this outbreak.

It has been good to see the -extent to which Canberra is sticking to its guns on this question.Until such a time as China is a democracy, or at the very least a more benign one-party state, its hostility towards criticism and -opposition to transparency will be a recurring challenge in our economic relationship.
---
CHINA'S secretive response to the origins of the COVID-19 pandemic highlighted an "allergy to transparency" which Australia was right to challenge, according to acting US Ambassador -Michael Goldman.

Mr Goldman said the Morrison Government should be "commended" for taking on China. China retaliated with a series of escalating trade strikes. "I think it shows, unfortunately, that while China's made some strides in this regard, there still is an impulse towards secrecy and an allergy to transparency," he said.
---
Dangers of California dreamin' Tim Blair speaks only the truth about the energy fiasco in California caused by the fact-free, ideologically driven, cult- like beliefs being pushed here by wealthy devotees of the Church of Climatology like Zali Steggall (Zali's doomed dream - Opinion, 27/12).

This prompts the question: will the new year bring some sanity to the climate and energy situation in Australia, or will we continue to be influenced by the noisy minority with no understanding of the physics, engineering and economics behind provision of affordable power?

Or will our politicians stay deaf to reality yet again and turn us into another California.?

Doug Hurst, Chapman, ACT "" " Tim Blair is an entertaining writer but he is wrong about nuclear power for Australia (Zali's doomed dream - Opinion, 28/12). Rather, Australia is one of the best places in the world for solar energy.

Geoscience Australia estimates that the solar radiation received annually contains 10,000 times more energy than what the country uses. Yet surprisingly we still generate fewer MWh per annum from solar than even the UK or Italy, so there is plenty of room for growth.

Perhaps Zali could take Tim for a spin when she buys her EV. Maybe like a car-mad friend of mine, he will become a convert.

Ray Peck, Hawthorn, Victoria

No point whining, when danger is heartbeat away Whingers complaining about the cancellation of events during this pandemic should grow up.

Anyone who has been keeping up with coronavirus events overseas, particularly the new mutated strain of the virus, will understand how we are still not out of the woods.

Closer to home Victoria was locked down due to it getting out of control. The northern beaches cluster is still causing concern as they have been unable to trace the source of the infection. NSW health has so far been able to catch other outbreaks across Sydney (Baffling puzzle of cluster's origins, 28/12).

Congratulations to the large numbers who have been tested. Unfortunately we have the young, silly and others that think it's OK to still have house and beach parties (Dreadful hangover of illegal parties, 28/12).

Cancelling the Sydney Hobart race was being proactive. Imagine if participants became sick or Tasmania closed access just in case and told the yachties to go back to where they came from.

Even New Year's Eve will be different this year to keep everyone safe (NYE restrictions announced by Gladys Berejiklian - Online, 28/12).

It is better to err on the side of caution than to deal with the headache when something goes wrong.

Joe Kovac, Prestons

In awe of ingenuity The December 11 decision by the federal government and pharmaceutical company CSL to end trials by the University of Queensland of a promising COVID-19 vaccine was both disappointing and reassuring.

Disappointing because the vaccine showed considerable promise, but reassuring because it showed that the responsible entities had an appropriately low risk tolerance.

Now the disappointment can be replaced by hope and optimism, with the very welcome news that the vaccine developed by Oxford University and pharmaceutical company AstraZeneca will be manufactured in Australia by Australian-born pharmaceutical company CSL (Oz-made vaccine is a winner, 28/12).

There seems to be no end to human ingenuity, especially in an emergency. Douglas Mackenzie, Deakin, ACT

Judging the judges Judges having a lend of us is nothing new - it has ever been thus. The judiciary is accountable to no one except themselves and their exclusive "club" (Justice delayed as judges on leave; 28/12).

It's time federal and state parliaments reviewed the arrangements for the appointment of judges in the various courts to deliver greater transparency and accountability.

Given the number of legal professionals who sit in these places, however, the task will not be an easy one.

There is also likely to be a reluctance to tread upon such sacred turf. John George, Terrigal

Boldly researching ...

Next-generation research is set to take on a whole new meaning with a study dubbed GenV set to track up to 150,000 newborns from birth to old age, examining every aspect of their health and wellbeing (Oh baby! A study to last a lifetime, 28/12).

The bold undertaking is expected to put Australian medical research at the forefront for decades to come.

Australia it seems does not need a starship to boldly go where no one has gone before.

Peter Penglis, Kambah, ACT

Euthanasia plebiscite With a new poll showing more than 70 per cent of NSW voters support voluntary assisted dying laws, euthanasia should not be left to politicians (NSW ready for die laws 27/12).

Best to have a plebiscite with the next election for voters to decide whether to legalise voluntary euthanasia.

Any proposed euthanasia laws must have strict guidelines so they can provide the appropriate balance to ensure that terminal long-suffering patients are empowered with the humane option to avoid a senseless painful death, that also impacts negatively on loved ones and friends.

What is life when there is no quality of life at all?

As Stephen Hawking once asked: "We don't let animals suffer, so why humans?" Steve Ngeow, Chatswood

Stumped by logic Australia's bowling attack was acclaimed as "the best ever" after its demolition of the Indian batting line up in the first Test, after the batting line-up seemed out of sorts with replacements for injured players in the top order.

Move forward to the Boxing Day Test, same "best ever" bowlers in the Aussie team and same nervous replacements in Australia's batting top order trying to impress selectors and guess what? Australia wins the toss and decides to bat and not bowl first (Holiday hangover, 27/12).

Has the "bubble" exhausted the oxygen from our decision makers? Bill Donovan, Port Macquarie

Dire year's fine leadership So, only a few days left in this year - which has delivered nothing but disaster for most of it.

We have had bushfire, flood and this COVID virus ruin many people's lives. So many will need years to get back to a normal life.

Lucky we have a very good PM in Scott Morrison and a good premier in Gladys Berejiklian. They have guided us with the correct decisions.

Hopefully this new vaccine will work. Wishing everybody a very happy antiviral 2021.

George Orban, Breakfast Point

Briefly ...

So, flying foxes with lyssavirus have been responsible for three deaths in the last 24 years, prompting a warning from Queensland Health (Bat virus alarm, 28/12). Seems to be overkill, just like their border closures to greater Sydney and the Blue Mountains.

Alyn, Penrith "" " Why waste millions of dollars in fireworks on New Year's Eve when no one can watch them, when we can wait just another few months and have a real celebration when we are all vaccinated. Seems to me to be a better reason for a celebration.

Ed Ginns, Londonderry "" " The people of NSW are being treated like an unimportant minority voice on the issue of voluntary assisted dying despite more than 70 per cent favouring the ability to die with dignity (NSW ready for die laws, 27/12). When did the church become the majority?

Janet Edwards, Kingsford

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
THE mood inside League Central yesterday, a day after the boss failed to return, was about as solemn as a Supreme Court photograph.

NRL head of football Graham Annesley had his weekly meeting with his football staff over Zoom and the questions were a little more urgent but he had few answers for them.

They wanted to know when they were needed back at work and how many games the new competition would have, when was Origin going to be played, and Annesley's answer was the same as it was around the rest of the game.

Nobody knows anything until ARL Commission Peter V'landys and the broadcasters, Channel 9 and Fox Sports, have reached some sort of resolution about what the revised broadcast deal looks like.

Clubs are asking the same questions as Annesley's staff.

Several Sydney clubs began talking to staff about possible resumption dates yesterday but each was the same. The conversations were light on detail.

Just who and how many are required, and when they will be needed, can't be decided until someone has some kind of idea about what the resumed competition looks like.

It is for these reasons the new broadcast negotiations will be done in record time.

There are now just 36 days until the competition is scheduled to return. V'landys met with Foxtel chief executive Patrick Delany yesterday and will meet with Channel 9 boss Hugh Marks as early as today.

Once he has the positions of each broadcaster, they will come together in the hope of finding common ground.

It is hoped there will be a resolution as early as Friday.

If so, it will be some kind of small miracle. Tens of millions of dollars are at stake and rarely are decisions made so quickly.

Already the talk is of a significant cut to this year's broadcast deal. The NRL will counter with an offer of more money and, as a trade, the potential to extend the current contract, -potentially with some of the money from the final year to be paid up front now.

Marks has already spoken of as much and it is a position the NRL is comfortable making.

The revised broadcast deal will be the first financial reset the game will undertake.

The clubs are pushing for more financial transparency, which V'landys has promised.

The salary cap will be taken to with some kind of heavy -machinery and football de-partments will be slashed -considerably.

The hope is that by the end of it, the NRL and clubs and players settle on a fair position, and a sustainable one.

It might be a great move forward for the game.

The NRL has carried the perception since the commission era began that clubs could not be trusted with their own money and so should be kept safe from themselves.

Only the NRL began carrying on with the same financial deception it had labelled the clubs with.

It began unravelling this year when the COVID-19 crisis hit and the NRL announced it had $104 million in the bank.

Clubs were told that another $25 million in receivables brought the amount to $129 million. The clubs felt nervous but confident.

I am sure that, at this time, the NRL had no idea of the -severity of what was about to hit so felt comfortable speaking with a little bravado. But then the true figures came out.

The $129 million included a $49 million deferred liability payment to be paid back by 2022. The $25 million in re-ceivables was realistically only $15 million.

So the $129 million was really $70 million.

Then it got worse.

The players asked for access to their hardship fund, given it was a full-blown crisis.

The NRL had to reveal it had not actually been banking their money. The agreement, they limply pointed out, was that the money had to be in their account at the end of the broadcast cycle.

Elsewhere, the clubs, because the NRL believed they could not be trusted, were ordered to pay money each season into a distressed clubs fund.

Again, with the clubs in some distress, the NRL did not have it either. Everyone knows the NRL pays the clubs $13 million a season, which should be more than enough with a salary cap under $10 million. But the club grant is back-ended in much the same way the NRL has been critical of clubs back-ending player contracts.

Funding in 2018 was $12.567 million, growing incrementally each year until the 2022 grant of $13.633 million. But even from that the NRL claws back a significant amount in forced payments on the clubs that -undermined the relationship.

Every year each club is asked to pay $110,000 for statistics, $178,000 for the NRL's digital department, $150,000 for a career-ending hardship fund, $188,000 for distressed club reserves and $60,000 cash after the NRL put a clause in for clubs to save money each year.

The NRL also stopped funding clubs for taking games to regional areas, making clubs not only have to pay for taking games away but obligating them to pay for the referees' equipment, too.

It also reduced each club's merchandise royalties from 40 per cent to 20 per cent, which worked out to be about an extra $60,000 in cash stripped from each club.

That is nearly three-quarters of a million dollars clubs never get to see for services, some of which they don't even want.

But the NRL is in the insult business.

So when the clubs and NRL negotiated a $1.21 million rescue package last month, to get them through May, April and June, the NRL held back $23,000 from each club, banking only $1.187 million into each club's bank accounts on April 1.

V'landys needed to intervene to force the NRL to pay its own clubs the amount it had agreed to pay.

So he comes together this week, with Delany and Marks, hoping to get done in a week what it usually takes many more months to get done.The entire game is hoping they get it done.
---
AS the sun sets on the first day of the new President of the United States its abundantly clear there has never been a more monumental occasion for the leader of the Free World.

Joe Biden starts his new job with the weight of expectation of a world wanting him to return some gravitas to the Oval Office.

Those who despised Trump will also want Mr Biden to make grand gestures and policy changes that are the antithesis of the Trump era.

There will also be those who become preoccupied with revenge for revenge's sake against a president they believe tainted the job, and indeed, democracy forever.

Those are the interest groups Mr Biden has to withstand.

It is one thing for justice to rightfully take its course and for Mr Trump to pay his dues for any unlawful activity and behaviour unbefitting a President - of which there are surely many. But Mr Biden's primary responsibility now is to correct the ship and, at the risk of sounding like a CNN soundbyte, unify as best he can a country which is still torn by anger, an anger which won't dissipate just because Mr Trump has left office.

The trap for Mr Biden and his team will be to mistake dealing with the radicals who stormed the Capitol as the main game. They are a sideshow, albeit a sideshow that has to bear the full force of the law. But a sideshow nonetheless.  Priority No.1, of course, is bringing COVID-19 under control, administering a successful vaccination program and using America's clout to ensure the investigation into the pandemic's origins is thorough and conclusive.

There needs to be no more ambiguity around the seriousness of the pandemic and its impact on families, jobs and the US health system coming from the Oval Office, which has up to now given strength to the ridiculous fringe groups such as the anti-mask movement. It is arguable that had the pandemic not occurred Mr Trump was on track to deliver on his promise of jobs growth and middle America prosperity and although that job has become a lot harder than it was it must remain a top priority for any government espousing the virtues of a united country. It is also incumbent on Mr Biden to restore some dignity and hope to the office - and in turn to the voters - that goes beyond a Hallmark verse. And, as simple as that sounds, it's often too easy a route for administrations that follow a term of government that was so laden down with unnecessary conflict and disappointment. America is going to need more than that.
---
Stumpy was a giant of our game Vale Arthur Summons (Gladiator to the end, 18/5).

Arthur Summons, nicknamed Stumpy, who died in Wagga Wagga aged 84 has left an everlasting impact on the game of rugby league.

Even though the half back was short in stature he was a giant in the game. What a fitting tribute to him and Norm Provan to be immortalised in that iconic NRL premiership trophy, too.

Gone but not forgotten, RIP Arthur Summons.

Joy Cameron, Young

Sad Greens reduced to playing comic relief card It's amazing what the Greens' Adam Bandt, Sarah Hanson-Young and the rest of their loony ilk can come up with (Greens' dream dead on arrival, 18/5).

If we were to adopt their policies or even just a few of them, Australia would be "up the creek without a paddle".

It will be hard enough to come back to economic prosperity from the Wuhan virus pandemic, without a bunch of fanatics trying to hijack our recovery.

It's so ludicrous in fact, I'm sure the clowns of our parliament have dreamt up this "green deal" as a bit of comic relief, to put a smile on our faces in these tense pandemic and economic times.

Peter Cattlin, Freshwater

The sacrifices of science History writer Troy Lennon has captured the real essence of human courage challenging science, describing the work and untimely death of volcanologist David Johnston 40 years ago. (Scientist died as Mount St Helen blew its top, 18/5).

The same selfless bravery is evident as the world records more than 1000 deaths of health workers battling the murderous COVID-19 virus.

When science entices our curiosity like the sirens of Greek mythology, the dangers and benefits of exploring Pandora's box are unfairly shared.

A singular, academic focus in David Johnston's life might well have blinded his instinct for safety and survival.

As is true in the fight with COVID-19, much is unknown, including assessing risk.

No volcanic smoke can hide our great admiration of the risk takers, who ultimately make our lives safer.

Alan Sexton, North Parramatta

Give the bush a break Just a thought: If there was an infectious outbreak in my regional area, would Sydney be locked down?

Of course not. So why are rural areas with no cases of COVID-19 still having to follow the same rules as the city?

Don't forget many rural areas have already been drastically affected by drought and bushfires and are in a bad way.

Premier, please let us get back to (sort of) normal!

Claire, Coonabarabran

Future proofing for Oz Well done to Australia and other countries that have banded together to look into the origin of COVID- 19 (ScoMo's COVID coup, 18/5).

At this time, China's bullying tactics have come to the fore as they threaten to suspend imports or put tariffs on goods that come from Australia.

The latest dummy spit on their part was not to even answer calls to discuss things.

It is a wake-up call to Australia and the rest of the world about China and its true intentions.

It's time to stop putting all our eggs in one basket, think outside the square and look at other markets to sell our goods.

Also, restarting our manufacturing industries, particularly with vital supplies, such as medical ones, could be a good start. This could be seen as an insurance policy for the future.

Joe Kovac, Prestons

History will pass judgment When the history of the 2020 coronavirus pandemic is written up Australia and New Zealand will be treated with merit (ScoMo's COVID coup, 18/5).

One man, one woman; one conservative government; one left-leaning government; all united in one purpose.

But, the analysis of China will be scathing.

However, 2020 might just be the catalyst that awakens that nation's 1.4 billion people and sets in motion change. People have to eat and it is certain those 1.4 billion will not be invited to the same table as the Communist Party elite.

Add the disgraceful insult to humanity China has displayed through its arrogance and the wheels of change might have just started to turn.

You've got to stay strong here PM - we are all in your corner on this. Warwick Egan, Umina Beach

We're not out of this yet Our new infections are very small now but each day I look at the recovered numbers and they just don't seem to be going down so much.

The recovery period is, in my reading, clearly a lot longer than a couple of weeks. Is it three weeks, four weeks, more?

And, just look at the McDonald's situation in Victoria. One case can affect dozens of employees and all their contacts.

Stay vigilant everybody, it's not over yet.

Garry Robinson, Mannering Park

Time is the enemy of truth While it appears that the demands for an independent and thorough investigation into the origins of the COVID-19 pandemic has finally found support from many other nations, it needs to happen pretty damn quick in my opinion (ScoMo's gang of 62, 18/5).

If China eventually acquiesces, it has had plenty of time to manipulate the data, eliminate evidence and enable a massive cover-up of vital information.

What occurs to me too, is the serious question of the total lack of appropriate support or indeed action by the very body which is supposedly responsible for the health of the world - the World Health Organisation.

Carol Cosham, Gymea Bay

Figures of substance Lots of people are, quite rightly, being thanked for all their hard work during the COVID-19 crisis.

One group that has been ignored and has been absolutely essential in flattening the curve are the mathematicians.

Thanks so much to this often maligned group.

We wouldn't know where we are without you, thanks for taking the work on the curve to the limit.

Peter, Cessnock

Now bump the bunker We just need one referee - and no NRL bunker (Interchange to entertain, 18/5). The bunker slows the game down too much, so get rid of it. Have two linesmen each side of the field and one each at the goalpost ends and make sure they know that they are paid to watch the game.

When a decision is to be made re a forward pass, try or no try etc they can confer with the referee. A decision is quickly made. Straight back to play.

Captains etc should not be allowed to question the decision. If they do so, send them off. They are there to play not to make decisions.

At the end of the season you will have won some and lost some but in the end all will be equal and we the spectators will be coming in droves to see a great and fast game.

Carmel Kennif, Randwick

Briefly …

With or without any inquiries or trade sanctions, the Chinese government has done enormous damage to the "Made in China" label.

Gary, Engadine.

"" " Come on premier, think outside the bureaucratic box. You can open the regional areas quicker than the metro. This one size fits all approach is so detrimental to the economy and the ever-reducing time frame to save small business.

Scott, Manly "" " This virus has put our country into unknown debt and problems but that's not enough for the loony Greens (Greens' dream dead on arrival, 18/5). If Labor/Greens get into power in the next 10 or more years we will never get out of debt.

Liz, Gosford

HAVE YOUR SAYMAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
PM: Sovereignty not for sale AUSTRALIA is open to meeting with Beijing officials to repair the relationship with China, but will not make "pre-emptive concessions," Prime Minister Scott Morrison says.

Mr Morrison said Australia valued its partnership with China, but would not be "conceding the points" it had "set out" on issues including foreign investment and human rights.

"We will of course remain absolutely open and available to meet, to discuss any of the issues that have been identified," he said.

"But those discussions, as I've made clear, won't take place on the base of any sort of pre-emptive concessions on Australia's part on those matters." Beijing officials have previously published a list of 14 grievances with Australia, insisting they be addressed in order for the damaged relationship to be repaired.

Australia's decision to block Huawei from its 5G contract, its calls for an investigation into the origins of COVID-19, the cancellation of some academic visas and criticism of tough new security laws in Hong Kong are among the Chinese Government's concerns.

Mr Morrison said Australia's position on those issues was "honest" and "transparent".

"But, of course, we value the trading and more broader comprehensive relationship, and we will be taking up whatever opportunities we believe is going to best position Australia to be in a position to advance that relationship," he said.

"It's an important relationship, but it is a relationship that will be pursued on the basis of Australia's national interests, and without, in any way, compromising Australia's sovereignty," he said.

Labor leader Anthony Albanese said on Monday he had written to Mr Morrison to suggest he engage with the expertise of former prime ministers amid increasing concern about jobs among the business community and union movement.

"It is China that is to blame for breaking down that relationship," he said. "But you need to find a way through, and I think that it is very sensible to engage former prime ministers Kevin Rudd and John Howard."
---
CHINESE threats to boycott Australian exports if the Morrison government continues to pursue an inquiry into the origins of the coronavirus pandemic have been dismissed as support for an -investigation remains strong.

China's ambassador to Australia Cheng Jingye said the Chinese public was dismayed at Australia's push for an independent inquiry into the COVID-19 outbreak and might consider boycotting major exports including beef and wine. He also said Chinese students may no longer travel to study in Australia.

"The parents of the students would also think whether this place which they found is not so friendly, even hostile, whether this is the best place to send their kids (to Australia)," he told the Australian Financial Review. "It is up to the people to decide. Maybe the ordinary people will say 'Why should we drink Australian wine? Eat Australian beef?'" But Labor's Foreign Affairs spokeswoman Penny Wong backed the government's call for an independent inquiry.

"The Chinese ambassador spoke about not wanting to resort to recrimination, division, and suspicion," she said.

"That is precisely the reason why we want to make sure the international community can be assured that we get to the bottom of the origin of the virus."Australian Health Minister Greg Hunt said an independent inquiry was in the interests of Australia and the world. "We've seen … over 200,000 lives lost so of course there has to be an independent review," Mr Hunt told the ABC.
---
ABOUT 90 per cent of Victoria's COVID-19 cases are likely traceable back to one family who quarantined at Melbourne's Rydges Hotel, an inquiry has heard.

But precisely how the virus -escaped from hotel quarantine -remains a mystery, with investigators unable to pinpoint the -moment of transmission.

The remaining cases in the state are likely connected to -another quarantine hotel, the Stamford Plaza, an expert says, with 99 per cent of all current cases linked to the bungled hotel quarantine program.

The family of four returned to Australia on May 9 and entered quarantine. After they all developed symptoms they were moved to the Rydges Hotel on Swanston St on May 15.

Giving evidence to the Melbourne hotel quarantine inquiry on Tuesday, epidemiologist Dr Charles Alpren said that on May 25 three staff members developed symptoms and were diagnosed with COVID-19.

He believes the three people -included both staff at Rydges and external contractors.

The family did not leave the hotel during their stay and were supervised when outside their room. The Stamford Plaza outbreak has two origins, one man and a couple who quarantined there.
---
ELECTRICITY grids, dams and telecommunications networks were all targets of the foreign hackers behind weeks of online attacks, experts say.

Industrial secrets which could give other countries an unfair advantage in trade talks were also the target of the major cyberattack that spanned all levels of government, businesses and political organisations.

Security sources believe China was to blame although the Morrison government has refrained from publicly naming the culprit, instead describing it as a "sophisticated state-based cyber actor".

Alastair MacGibbon, the federal Government's former cyber security tsar, described the attack as "aggressive" and said the hackers were potentially hunting for information which could help them commit "destructive acts" in the future.

"It strikes me as a strategic intelligence exercise on their part; find out as much as you can about Australia, steal trade secrets to help our country versus theirs," he said.

"Cyber is going to play very heavily in war, and it's obviously going to play very heavily in the lead-up to war.

"You need access in order to carry out destructive activities, and we need to get much smarter and better at -protecting our critical infrastructure.  "Cyber security is the greatest existential threat we're going to face." Mr MacGibbon said he was unsure which nation was behind the massive cyber-hit on Australia which also targeted essential services, critical infrastructure and the education sector, as well as government systems.

Yesterday China denied responsibility. "The attacks and the blame coming from this institute against China is totally baseless and nonsense," China Ministry of Foreign -Affairs spokesman Zhao Lijian said.

He said China was the "biggest victim of cyber attacks" and was committed to cyber security.

Australian security agencies have spent weeks using -offensive tactics to keep hackers out of companies and government computers.

The wave of cyber attacks comes one month after Australia won unanimous support for its bid to set up an independent probe into the origins of the COVID-19 pandemic. Australia's relationship with China was further strained by a recent trade dispute, travel bans and a warning from Beijing that tourists and students should reconsider coming to Australia. Canberra has also condemned the death sentence handed to Australian alleged drug smuggler Karm Gilespie as well as China's plan to impose a strict national security law on Hong Kong.
---
AUSTRALIA has asked powerful world leaders, including China, to consider an independent committee headed by a top UK health expert to lead an inquiry into the origins of the coronavirus.

The federal Government is using every available inter-national channel, including private talks with the Chinese Government and formally writing to the G20, to seek support for an independent review into the COVID-19 pandemic response.

In a letter to G20 leaders this week Prime Minister Scott Morrison outlined two possible mechanisms for an independent review, believing some existing groups were well placed to make recommendations to the World Health Organisation.

One option was to have the Independent Oversight and Advisory Committee for the WHO Emergencies Program lead the inquiry. It is understood Australia sees the committee, led by UK public health expert Dr Felicity Harvey, as almost purpose built for the review.

The second option put forward by Mr Morrison to G20 leaders was to use WHO's International Health Regulations which is an agreement between all WHO member nations to build their capacity to detect, assess and report public health events.

Australia is hoping to build a coalition of the willing to support an inquiry, which Mr Morrison has emphasised is about learning the lessons of the outbreak, rather than targeting any one country.It is understood the government hopes its upfront -approach will be successful.
---
SYDNEY criminals are getting caught with millions in cash as the pandemic shatters their efforts to launder money through casinos and poker machines, NSW Police and other law enforcement agencies said.

In the latest seizure, police allegedly found $1m (pictured) in cash at the East Hills home of a relative of a Middle Eastern crime family after they stopped his car on Friday afternoon in Riverwood. Police also allegedly found cocaine and $120,000 in cash hidden in secret compartments in the car.

"It appears criminals are holding a lot more cash at the moment as they can't launder their money in traditional means because of the restrictions placed on them by COVID-19," Detective Superintendent Martin Fileman of the NSW Organised Crime Squad said. "We are catching people with cash more frequently from amounts of tens of thousands of dollars up to the millions." Border closures have also hit crime syndicates who often move money interstate to clean cash.

Det. Supt. Fileman said there are now huge amounts of cash sitting in homes and storage facilities waiting to be laundered.

"The amount in those units would run into the hundreds of millions," he said. Other senior law enforcement officers told The Telegraph that a drop in foreign students has also hampered laundering syndicates.

"Foreign students are often used to remit money to overseas bank accounts and then transferred back in a variety of ways in an attempt to hide its origins," the officer said.

He said it also could explain the recent spike in gangsters kidnapping each other and holding them for ransom. "They know that they are having problems moving cash so that makes them very attractive targets for extortion," he said.
---
DRAMA A TEACHER 8.30PM, SUNDAY, FOX SHOWCASE WHEN Claire (Kate Mara, pictured) shoplifts lipstick from the supermarket, it hints that this high school teacher might be looking for some excitement in her life beyond correcting assignments. Enter: Eric (Nick Robinson), a handsome and popular teenage athlete in need of some extra tutoring

GENIUS: ARETHA 7.30PM, MONDAY, FOXTEL NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC IN this third instalment in the Genius anthology series, Cynthia Erivo (pictured) not only plays Aretha Franklin but performs her music as well. These first two episodes shed light on Aretha's tumultuous relationships with her preacher father and first husband.

STAGED 9.05PM, TUESDAY, ABC TV PLUS MICHAEL Palin guest stars as a curmudgeonly version of himself when this faux fly-on-the-wall series about actors Michael Sheen and David Tennant (both pictured) in lockdown returns. The pair hatch a plan over Zoom to remake their improvised comedy for an American audience. - Siobhan Duck

CRIME CI AUSTRALIA: MOST INFAMOUS 6.20PM, SUNDAY, FOXTEL CRIME + INVESTIGATION THIS episode dives into the tragic death of Dr Victor Chang (pictured), one of Australia's most gifted heart surgeons who was on the brink of pioneering the world's first artificial heart. In July 1991, Chang was shot twice in the head in a failed extortion attempt.

WORLD'S MOST EVIL KILLER 7.30PM, SUNDAY, FOXTEL CRIME + INVESTIGATION BACK-TO-BACK episodes tonight. Billy Dunlop (pictured) was already in jail when he bragged to a guard he'd killed his girlfriend Julie Hogg, as her family suspected, but the UK's double jeopardy laws meant he wouldn't be tried for the crime. He was wrong.

7NEWS PRESENTS: IVAN MILAT - BURIED SECRETS 7PM, SUNDAY, SEVEN HE'S thankfully been dead for a year, but the search for victims we do not know about continues - this special talks to criminologists and criminal psychologists who believe Milat's body count is higher than seven backpackers. - Cameron Adams

FOOD JAMIE'S ULTIMATE VEG 8.30PM, THURSDAY, SBS FOOD YOU know you've got to do it, so embrace the change and check out the cheeky chappy cook's solutions to injecting mealtimes with more vegetable goodness. Episode one starts with the easy options of cottage pie and mac 'n' cheese.

TASTE THE NATION WITH PADMA LAKSHMI 8.30PM, MONDAY, SBS FOOD THE American television personality and cookbook author hits the road to explore the influence of immigrants on American cuisine. Padma (pictured) checks in with a German family to explore the origins of the sporting culinary staple, the hot dog.

THE GREAT BRITISH BAKE OFF 8.30PM, TUESDAY, FOXTEL LIFESTYLE FOOD BAKE Off is going to get bonkers this season with comedian Matt Lucas (pictured) joining the team - cannot wait to see the flour fly between him and Noel Fielding. But of course the amateur bakers and their creations are the true stars of the show. - Kathy McCabe

LIFESTYLE CELEBRITY IOU 8.30PM, FRIDAY, FOXTEL TLC JUST when you thought Brad Pitt couldn't get any more swoon-worthy comes this home reno show. The Hollywood superstar reveals his sense of humour is as well-developed as his rippling muscles when he enlists Jonathan and Drew (both pictured) to makeover his make-up artist's house.

GRAND DESIGNS NEW ZEALAND 7.40PM, SUNDAY, ABC TV ARCHITECT Craig Jarvis (pictured) and his kids lived in a shed for years to realise his dreams of building a "living house" on the side of a sheer cliff face. What's a living house? Well, according to Craig, it's a home built with non-toxic, recycled materials that is completely sustainable and off-the-grid.

FLIP OR FLOP 9.30PM, FRIDAY, FOXTEL TLC IF you are looking for renovation inspiration then this is the show for you. Tarek and Christina (both pictured) are a couple who buy and renovate run-down properties to sell for profit. This week they transform a dilapidated five-bedroom house with a confusing layout. - Siobhan Duck

DOCO PILGRIMAGE: THE ROAD TO ROME 9.30PM, SUNDAY, ABC TV PLUS Eight UK celebs - you'll probably only recognise comedian Stephen K. Amos - of differing faiths strap on backpacks and have 15 days to tackle 1000km of the ancient Via Francigena pilgrimage, from the Italian Alps to Rome. In this first episode, the intrepid eight arrive in Martigny, Switzerland.

THE STORY OF THE SONGS 9.25PM, MONDAY, SBS This is a cool journey through the songs that made the biggest music stars who they are today. Tonight is Cher - we see how she went from a young girl reluctant in the recording studio to a chart-topping titan. Who knew Sonny Bono (pictured with Cher) wrote I Got You Babe after being inspired by Bob Dylan?

COVID DIARIES NYC 8.30PM, WEDNESDAY, FOX SHOWCASE This deeply personal film chronicles the lives of five young filmmakers who turned the cameras on themselves to tell the stories of their families during the first wave of COVID-19 in New York. It's heart-wrenching at times reliving those initial terrifying days. - Lisa Woolford

KIDS STILLWATER STREAMING, APPLETV+ ADAPTED from the Scholastic book series, Zen Shorts, this is the quiet TV your kids may need after a chaotic day at school. The story centres on siblings Karl, Addy and Michael, who face life's challenges with the help of their wise and completely huggable neighbour Stillwater. A gem of a show.

THE LOUD HOUSE 4.30PM, WEEKDAYS, FOXTEL NICKELODEON ON the flip side, look out for two weeks of brand new episodes of this boisterous cartoon. In "Cow Pie Kid", Lynn pushes Liam to his limits when he becomes the star pitcher for the middle school baseball team. Then, Lincoln's friends try to stop him from performing a magic act at the talent show.

TOTAL WIPEOUT 6.25PM, WEEKDAYS, 10 SHARE THINK Ninja over water and mud - this action series will be right up your kids' alley. Hosted by Top Gear's Richard Hammond (pictured), this UK series sees 20 contestants take on a purpose-built course, testing their agility and humility levels as they chase a place in the grand final at season's end. - Holly Byrnes
---
ROOSTERS recruit Josh Morris says NRL players could be forced back into the workforce following the COVID-19 pandemic, admitting: "Ending up on the tools this year is a very real prospect." With the NRL competition suspended indefinitely, it now appears certain that everyone involved in elite rugby league - including some 480 players - are going to be forced into taking pay cuts.

Speaking on Triple M early yesterday, Morris conceded that with no end date on the code's shutdown, even senior players like himself could be forced back into the workforce.

Quizzed on the impact the game's shutdown could have on players, Morris replied: "For myself, I've played the game long enough to have some money put away.

"But I also have mortgages that I have to pay as well.

"I'm doing a carpentry course at TAFE at the moment and could end up on the tools at the end of the year, it's a very real prospect." Despite starting the year with Cronulla, Morris had only this week switched to the Roosters, where he was preparing for his first game with the Chooks alongside twin brother Brett.

The 33-year-old centre, who boasts six Tests for Australia and 15 Origins with NSW, revealed the shutdown came only hours into his first day at Roosters HQ.

"I had a pretty long day getting to know all the boys," Morris said of his Monday arrival. "Then at 5.30pm last night we had a meeting and got told the season was being suspended.

"We are just waiting on advice from the head and obviously the club to see what to do.

"Like everyone we will probably be in isolation of some sort."Morris also told Triple M that he was particularly concerned for those younger players "living month-to-month on their pay cheque".
---
No visit to virus hotspot for WHO COVID probe

A WORLD Health Organisation team investigating the origins of COVID-19 in China failed to visit Wuhan, sparking fears the whims of Beijing are being prioritised over independent science.

Two WHO representatives tasked with laying the groundwork for a larger team of international experts to investigate the zoonotic source of the virus spent three weeks in China this month without stepping foot in the city widely considered ground zero of the pandemic.

The glaring omission has fuelled concern the Chinese Government could thwart any attempt at a truly impartial inquiry into COVID-19.

Liberal MP and former Ambassador to Israel Dave Sharma said he was "alarmed" the team spent so much time in China but did not visit Wuhan, the "origin of the outbreak" and the home of the Wuhan Institute of Virology: "If this investigation is to help prevent future pandemics, it must be independent and enjoy unfettered access. The WHO needs to put the public health interest of the world before the sensitivities of any particular nation." The WHO's investigation into the animal source of the coronavirus was one component of a resolution backed by Australia at the World Health Assembly earlier this year.

WHO spokesman Christian Lindmeier said the team sent to China for preliminary investigations did speak with Wuhan scientists via video. "The team had extensive discussions with Chinese counterparts and received updates on epidemiological studies, biologic and genetic analysis and animal health research," he said.

But the Financial Times has reported a senior US official has raised serious concerns about the lack of access to Wuhan during the August trip. "The WHO delegation sat in Beijing for three weeks and got nowhere near Wuhan," the official reportedly said.
---
THE big Australian miners have welcomed China's move to change inspection rules for iron ore imports despite concerns shipments could be blocked under the new regime.

Brushing aside fears the change may mark a heightening in trade tensions, the mining industry yesterday said China was effectively streamlining the inspection process.

But their upbeat response came amid conflicting commentary on the potential impact of the changes, which take effect on June 1.

China has opted to do away with mandatory inspections of inbound iron ore in favour of a narrower regime of checks - sampling and testing shipments at the request of traders or importers.

In one state-run Chinese media outlet, the Global Times, the change was yesterday cast as a threat to Australian producers.

The Global Times quoted Chinese academic Yu Lei, a chief research fellow at the Research Centre for Pacific Island Countries at Liaocheng University, in the Shandong Province, suggesting it was "another implicit warning to Australia".

"It is associated with how Australia has acted, and a general decline in demand for steel on the global level," he was quoted as saying.

The media outlet, often seen as a proxy for the views of the Chinese government, explicitly linked the rule changes to trade tensions between Australia and China.

Since the start of last week, China has suspended imports of beef from four Australian abattoirs and slapped import taxes on Australian barley.

Those moves have coincided with a diplomatic dispute over a proposed inquiry into the origins of the COVID-19 virus, which first made headlines globally after an outbreak in the Chinese city of Wuhan.

The Global Times also reported, however, that the changes to iron ore inspections would not affect imports from Australia.

It noted the announcement came "amid tensions", and that "may lead some to believe it targets Australia".

"Though there is no evidence that the new adjustment will have any negative impact on future iron ore imports from Australia," it said.

The new customs rules will apply to all iron ore cargoes - not just those from Australia - China's General Administration of Customs said the changes were designed to promote deregulation and promote trade.

A BHP spokesman said the group supported the changes and believed they would "create a more efficient supply chain for producers like us as well as our Chinese customers".

Fortescue chief Elizabeth Gaines also welcomed the changes, saying the company remained a core supplier of iron ore to China.

"This is part of a broader suite of efficiency reform measures under development by the Chinese Government since 2015," Ms Gaines said.

Minerals Council of Australia chief Tania Constable said Australia was a "key partner with China's steel industry … and these reforms will enhance this valued business partnership".

Federal Trade Minister Simon Birmingham joined the industry in welcoming the reform, saying it was "positive example of the further opening of Chinese markets".

Shares in pureplay iron ore heavyweight Fortescue Metals fell 2.2 per cent, or 30c, yesterday to $13.60. BHP and Rio Tinto shares also fell, respectively sliding 0.6 per cent to $34.51 and 1 per cent to $93.91.

with Richard Ferguson The Australian
---
'The great lesson of Watergate," said veteran reporter Bob Woodward, who broke the scandal that toppled US President Richard Nixon, "was that if Nixon had apologised early, or even midway through the scandal and demonstrated some soul-searching introspection, he would have been forgiven." The very same can be said of Victorian Premier Daniel Andrews over his government's decision to use private security instead of police and defence force personnel in the management of Victoria's hotel quarantine plan.

The difficulty of a crisis is that it requires momentous decisions in rapid fire time frames and that, often, it's only long after the worst of it passes that the impact of decisions become known. What might seem like a small decision at the time can, later on, become one of the most critical. It's important, when we look back at the events of Friday, March 27, not to forget this.

Do I think, knowing what they know now, that coming out of the National Cabinet at 1pm, the Andrews government would have made the decision and announced it at 3.15pm in the Premier's media conference, to use private security in quarantine hotels? No, I don't.

In a crisis, mistakes will be made, and while you must do everything to mitigate them, delay is just as risky. So, it requires a weighing of both. This is where the words of Woodward are so relevant to Victoria right now.

The Premier is being pursued over the question of who made the decision to use private security guards, not so much because it was an error but because he has used every political device available to him to avoid telling the truth. As always in political crises like this, it's the cover-up that brings the leader down.

For months, Victorians werekept in the dark about the origins of the state's second-wave outbreak until the Premier was forced to admit the disease had leaked out of the failed hotel quarantine operation when genomic testing confirmed 99 per cent of new cases were linked to hotels.

With things so clearly out of control, the federal government's repeated offer of ADF troops was finally taken up in late June - 850 personnel on their way - only to be abruptly withdrawn by the Andrews government the next day lest the "optics" of the ADF coming to the rescue in Victoria showed up the Premier, Police Minister Lisa Neville and their police and emergency union mates. We will never know what might have been the outcome if the troops had arrived. It was only after he could no longer spin away the need for an investigation that the Premier established the Coate Inquiry but, by its very terms of reference and powers under the state's Inquiries Act it lacked the grunt needed to get to the truth.

Of course, the Premier wants Coate to find that somehow no one made an actual decision to jettison police and instead employ private security, because any person who had made that decision would be culpable for the deaths of 800 Victorians out of the state's second-wave outbreak.

Powerful new industrial manslaughter laws in Victoria have put the wind up ministers, political staff and bureaucrats, and led to the farce of weeks of testimony where "I don't know", "I can't recall", "it wasn't me", and "I don't remember" has replaced any semblance of accountability in the state.

The line being put to the inquiry is that no one person made a decision here and that, instead, there was a government-wide "creeping assumption" that private security would be used, rather than Victoria Police or the ADF, to guard returning travellers. I regard this as wrong and nothing close to the truth.

Key decisions are made, they don't just happen. The notion that no one made this decision cannot be allowed to stand because it erodes the fundamental principle we have in our democracy of responsible government. I've been on the inside of government for 16 years - in times of crisis like the Martin Place siege, the downing of MH17, and the deployment of troops to fight against Islamic State - and let me tell you, every decision is made deliberately, the head of power to make that decision is carefully confirmed and every decision is authorised.

The decision to use private security in Victoria was made between 1pm, when National Cabinet concluded on Friday, March 27, and 3.15pm when Daniel Andrews publicly announced it. No "creeping assumption" becomes established in just two and half hours, and no Premier announces anything without being sure of what he is announcing, least of all a character like Andrews.

On Friday last week, all hell broke loose as the various parties to the COVID-19 Hotel Quarantine Inquiry lodged their closing submissions. Victoria Police couldn't have been more definitive, saying that they rejected any concept of a "creeping assumption", and said that a decision was made. Indeed, they pinpoint the time it was made as being within 1.16pm and 1.22pm - the much discussed six minute window, between then Chief Commissioner of Police Graham Ashton's text at 1.16pm asking whether his police officers would end up guarding hotels and another text at 1.22pm making clear that security guards were to be used (with a follow up text confirming this was all because of a "deal set up with DPC" (Department of Premier and Cabinet) for Victoria not to use police as in other states, but instead hire private security.

This is the critical decision that, with hindsight, led to 800 Victorians losing their life, hundreds of thousands of small businesses their livelihood, and, even as you read this today, has meant five million Melbourne residents remain in their 12th week of lockdown.

I had never attended a press conference as a member of the media until I fronted the Andrews press conference on Friday because I couldn't stomach the spin anymore. Valiant reporters have been asking tough questions for months, and for that they've been vilified online and trolled just for seeking the truth.

But isn't that what a free press is for? I couldn't care less about the #Istandwithdan haters. I have a thick skin. I've done my best to read all the evidence I can. Let me tell you, the holes are glaring, that's why, despite the Premier's skilful obfuscation, he can no longer smother and spin what's gone on.

Inside the Victoria Police submission is critical evidence that during the Ashton six-minute window there is a text from the Premier's private office to a deputy secretary (Mr Tim Ada) in the Premier's department referencing the provision of "security" in relation to the set-up of the hotel quarantine plan. This is just 19 minutes after the National Cabinet meeting had concluded that police and ADF would guard these hotels across the country, yet barely 20 minutes later, Victoria is going it alone with private security. There was never a "creeping assumption" about hotel security. There was a decision. There was a clear decision made involving the Premier's own office. It was made and communicated to Graham Ashton in the six-minute window and reconfirmed - as evidence to the Coate Inquiry shows - in a 2pm meeting between the Police Chief, the Police Minister and the head of Emergency Management Victoria. Daniel Andrews himself then announced the decision at 3.15pm out front of his own office.

If Daniel Andrews thinks otherwise, he can release his phone records and those of his key minister and staff, including his chief of staff who has never given any statement or evidence to this inquiry, to clear the record. He shouldn't need to be asked to do this by the inquiry. He should volunteer it in the public interest. He can do it today and he must do if we are to respect the dead by getting to the truth of what went so catastrophically wrong.
---
Australia needs to sharpen up its understanding of how Xi Jinping plays the game Australia is a child -playing chess against China the grand -master. When it comes to negotiations between Australia and China and the current spat, there are a few strategic differences between our nations that could explain why Australia is not coming out on top.

One of the two biggest differences are that Australians are direct in their communication behaviours and often pride themselves in calling a 'spade a spade' and our political structure -encourages short-term thinking with Australian states and federal parliaments limited to terms of three to four years.

On the other hand, Chinese culture employs indirect communication behaviours and takes a long-term view of things. How much "face" is lost or gained in communication is critical to decision making in China, alongside the solidity of their "guanxi" - or business relationships.

We are indeed in a game of chess with the masters and if we want any chance of winning, we need to understand the Chinese culture. The best way to do that is to get a grip on Sun Tzu's famous text The Art of War and the 36 Chinese strategies that are outlined in it.

During 2020 China has applied several of the 36 Chinese Strategies on Australia following Prime Minister Morrison's public call for the inquiry into the origins of the COVID-19 pandemic. These strategies are deeply embedded in Chinese politics, business, and trade, and across all facets of everyday life.

In the last application, China used Strategy Two - "Besiege Wei to rescue Zhao", which is used when you want to attack something your opponent holds dear. In this situation, Australia's good reputation across the globe is something that is held close to the heart of the Australia psyche.

We often perceive ourselves as a small country punching above our weight contributing positively to global affairs. It is against this image of ourselves that China has applied Strategy Two, seeking to damage our reputation and standing outside China when it used Twitter to show a fake image of an Australian soldier holding a knife at the neck of an -Afghan child.

The application of Strategy Two worked as planned because it pressed Australia's emotional buttons. As much as this photograph was, terrible the most appropriate way to respond to this strategy is calmly and strategically as opposed to emotionally.

This year China has also applied Strategy Twenty - "Trouble the water to catch the fish" - by announcing they would urge their citizens not to travel to Australia because of the supposed rise in racism against -Chinese people.

This strategy is used to create confusion. Instead of acting in a very reactive manner, we could have thought through the reality of this advice and realised this was not logical. Rather it was a successful strategic move on China's part to create confused reactions within Australia.

In August, Wang Xining, the deputy Head of Mission at China's embassy to Australia, used Strategy Thirty-Two - "The strategy of open city gates", which is a deliberate display of vulnerability. He addressed the National Press Club and in that speech he revealed the depth of China's hurt at Australia's focus on Wuhan as the source of the COVID-19 pandemic. It was the very public and direct manner in which Australia called for the international investigation into the origin of COVID-19 that has resulted in China "losing face", which is the hurt that Wang Xining referred to.

Wang Xining's speech was an invitation to understand China's concerns so Australia and China might be able to repair their relationship. Had we been able to listen through the filter of the 36 Chinese Strategies, we might have realised Wang Xining was inviting us to see the situation from China's point of view.

The only way forward for Australia is to understand Chinese culture. Australia has too much to lose to keep using our outrage and our Western negotiation approaches.

We are children playing chess with Chinese grand masters. Leonie McKeon is an expert on Chinese negotiation techniques. leoniemckeon.com
---
Powerful elites and media barons in WA have all but muted criticism of China, writes Jane Marwick

You'd think a billionaire springing a Chinese Communist Party diplomat on a federal government minister would be front page news in his home state.

But not in WA, where the only daily newspaper and top-rating nightly news are influenced by another billionaire and fellow China enthusiast.

When Andrew Forrest presented the Victorian Consul-General to China at a federal government press conference on Wednesday, observers were stunned. Except those who live in Western Australia, where kowtowing to the Chinese government is presented as normal.

Having heard that Health Minister Greg Hunt was hosting a press conference with the WA iron ore magnate, I sat down to watch and record the circus.

Not only did Mr Forrest invite Consul-General Long Zhou as a guest, he introduced him at the podium, where Mr Long proceeded to address the media. Hunt was reportedly blindsided by the stunt. He certainly looked uncomfortable.

Shocked by the seemingly audacious move, the nation's media sprang into action. I found that reaction a relief.

Because this was not the first time that Mr Forrest had acted in this way. But it's the first time the rest of the nation has seen it.

On April 1 (yes, April Fool's Day), in announcing the "procurement" of Personal Protective Equipment from China, "Twiggy" Forrest joined the WA Minister for Health Roger Cook at a press conference. Mr Forrest's special guest was China's Consul-General in WA, Madam Dong.

The fact that a representative of the Chinese government was not only present but spoke at a WA government press conference barely caused a ripple.

Instead, Mr Forrest was lauded by the WA Health Minister for his intervention in securing the PPE in a competitive environment, with the agreement that he would be reimbursed by the taxpayer.

The exercise earned him a glowing front page the following day. A week later, Mr Forrest had the temerity to tell local radio "There's been a bit of banter saying, you know, oh there's these business people, these bad, bad business people sending precious masks and PPE to China in January and February. Well mate, I'm guilty as charged. I did that too. That was when they were in the middle of their worst crisis. Now, I sent hundreds of thousands of products over there," he crowed.

Mr Forrest's argument was that the favour was repaid many times over. "These guys are just heroic" he gushed.

They're also part of an autocratic regime that oppresses, "re-educates", blackmails and kills dissenters. Beijing attempted to silence doctors including the late Li Wenliang, who was censored when he tried to warn about the dangers of the frightening new virus in Wuhan in December.

But Mr Forrest is not alone when it comes to extolling the virtues of the communist regime.

Author of Silent Invasion: China's Influence In Australia, Professor Clive Hamilton refers to WA's network of business people and political leaders as Perth's "China Club". And with good reason. He told journalist Nathan Hondros that: "Western Australia seemed to be particularly prone to political influence through the business community and through political leaders who've been cultivated over many years." The rich and powerful in WA have ensured that the soft power of Beijing enjoys the warm embrace of media allies and government in the state.

Opinion editorials praising China are par for the course. Madam Dong has written at least two.

Criticism of the regime is, at best, muted.

On Thursday, right on cue, the West Australian's front page ran a photograph of Seven West Media's Chairman Kerry Stokes under the headline DOLLARS AND SENSE.

Splashed over three pages, the billionaire called for the Commonwealth to appease China, warning that, "Australia's prosperity was in jeopardy if Beijing's anger was left unchecked". The paper stated: "Mr Stokes said it was not sensible for Australia to 'poke our biggest provider of income in the eye'." Beijing's anger? How about the rest of us? Globally, COVID-19 has claimed the lives of more than 230,000 people, and while the loss of life in Australia has been limited to 93 poor souls, the hit to our economy and way of life has been disastrous.

Wages have been slashed, and hundreds of thousands have lost their jobs. More than one million people are on JobSeeker or the dole, and 540,000 employers have applied for the JobKeeper subsidy covering an estimated 3.3 million workers.

The effect of the pandemic emanating from China is devastating. The Prime Minister is right to want an independent inquiry into the origins of the virus.

But Mr Forrest and Mr Stokes argue that any investigation should be delayed and take place after the US election in November.

If tracing its genesis can help guard against future pandemics, surely expediency is warranted.

The fallout from Wednesday's press conference, including The West's front page, should raise serious questions about the dissemination of news and the wielding of influence in Western Australia's constrained media.Jane Marwick is a broadcaster and commentator.
---
Chinese diplomats have a tradition of avoiding offence. They are known for delicacy and tact, even beyond usual diplomatic demands.

Deputy head of mission at the Chinese Embassy, Minister Wang Xining, yesterday did his level best to destroy that image during a speech at Canberra's National Press Club.

Wang, China's version of Iraq's famously fact-averse Comical Ali, alternated in his speech between pure fiction and a drama queen level of self-pity.

The maladroit diplomat claimed Australia's call for an independent review into the origins of the coronavirus "hurt the feelings" of the Chinese people.

"At latest count COVID-19 has killed 800,000 people worldwide and caused economic disruption on a scale not seen since the Great Depression," Dave Sharma, the Member for Wentworth, responded "If getting to the bottom of what caused this generates some 'hurt feelings', I think that is the least of our concerns." Wang said Australia's call for an investigation was a "shocking proposal." Yet Australia's only aim is to learn exactly how the virus began and was spread. How shocking is that?

Wang also took issue with Australia identifying the city of Wuhan as the source of the -initial coronavirus outbreak.

Although Wang noted the virus was "first identified in China" and "first reported in China", he claimed that did not mean Wuhan was the source.

He said researchers should be given the space to "find out the origin". Maybe Wang and the Chinese government would -prefer it if researchers begin their search in Tenterfield, or perhaps the Blue Mountains.

Anywhere but Wuhan. Still, if Wang insists on researchers being allowed to seek the origin of the virus, we can make that a part of the independent review.

Elsewhere in his speech, Wang said China "respects Australia sovereignty". "As China's sovereignty was constantly under threat and -disarray from external powers, the last thing China wants to do is to inflict on others what China suffered," he said. "Or to bully others as we were bullied." Oh, please. Someone buy this bloke a laptop and boot up some recent footage from Hong Kong. Or some old footage from Tiananmen Square. China inflicts suffering on its own people. With the virus, it has taken that policy global.
---
If you liked… CATCHING MILAT Try… 7NEWS PRESENTS: IVAN MILAT - BURIED SECRETS 7PM, SUNDAY, SEVEN A YEAR after Australia's worst serial killer Ivan Milat died an appropriately painful death in maximum security prison, more of his violent secrets emerge is this gripping new Spotlight investigation by Seven.

Continuing the search for new victims and exploring more burial grounds, producers actually uncover new detail and offer fascinating analysis from criminal psychologist Tim Watson-Munro and cold case specialist Xanthe Mallett. High-profile lawyer Chris Murphy, who once considered representing the evil murderer, also makes a shock appearance.

But perhaps the most compelling, and traumatic, parts of this special is when we hear from the families of those who believe their children or partners were his unnamed victims, dating back 50 years and numbering in their dozens. Terrifying and tragic and not to be missed. - Holly Byrnes

comedy FISK 9PM, WEDNESDAY, ABC TV KITTY Flanagan (pictured), Marty Sheargold and Julia Zemiro star in this clever comedy set in a probate legal office. Flanagan is Helen Tudor-Fisk, the daughter of a supreme court judge who, at 47, has run away from life after her husband ran off with an older woman and has had to start again. It's just the 'press pause' on your weekly stream of outrage you may need, with added chuckles. - HB

lifestyle MEN IN KILTS 9PM, WEDNESDAY, FOX ONE EWAN McGregor and his Long Way Round franchise will have to share the roads and screen with another celebrity Scot in Outlander's Sam Heughan and his buddy Graham McTavish (pictured, right with Heughan. The boys-own adventure continues this week with episodes three and four, exploring their heritage and meeting an incredible collection of people who capture what it means to be Scottish. Pour a whiskey and enjoy. - HB

doco FORMULA 1: DRIVE TO SURVIVE STREAMING, FROM FRIDAY, NETFLIX COVID-19 turned a lot of world sport on its head, but somehow, Formula 1 racing managed to get back on track - albeit for a shortened 2020 season. Go behind the scenes as teams keep their distance but don't lose any of their drive and determination to win. Stars Lewis Hamilton, Aussie favourite Daniel Ricciardo (pictured) and other top drivers. - HB

MUST WATCH If you like superhero movies you'll like Zack Snyder's Justice League. Streaming from 5pm, Thursday on BINGE.

WHEN Zack Snyder stepped away from the original production of Justice League in 2017 due to a family tragedy, another director stepped in to complete the movie. For years, fans wondered what Snyder's true vision would have been, and never gave up hope of the existence of an original cut for the movie. Years later, after fans campaigned hard to make it happen, the new film is finally here. In true Snyder fashion, expect a darker, serious and grittier approach, jam-packed with action and a deeper look into the major DC Extended Universe superheroes including Superman, Batman and Wonder Woman. With an all-star cast led by Ben Affleck, Henry Cavill and Gal Gadot, it's sure to be the epic must-see movie event of the year.

movie LET THEM ALL TALK NOW STREAMING, BINGE CELEBRATED actors Meryl Streep (pictured), Dianne Wiest and Candice Bergen play old friends in this comedy-drama directed by Steven Soderbergh. Streep plays a novelist of much acclaim struggling to fi nish her latest novel. Because she doesn't fly, she decides to invite her old friends for support and even reconciliation aboard the Queen Mary 2.

drama SUPERMAN & LOIS NEW EPISODES THURSDAYS, BINGE THE superhero shows of the DC Extended Universe get even better with this new series focused on the Man of Steel and his family. Settled in Smallville, Clark Kent/Superman (Tyler Hoechlin, pictured) and Lois (Elizabeth Tulloch) are raising their two sons. They must deal with teenagers discovering their own Kryptonian powers and, of course, endless threats to the world.

doco PERSONA: THE DARK TRUTH BEHIND PERSONALITY TESTS NOW STREAMING, BINGE PERSONA explores the origins of America's great obsession with personality testing and the intriguing history behind the world-famous Myers-Briggs Type Indicator. What this documentary also raises is a whole slew of ethical questions, around how they can often do more harm than good.
---
REFORM AGENDA THE threat of a trade war with China has not stopped Australia capitalising on its success in gaining support for a coronavirus inquiry by now lobbying world leaders to give health -officials inspection powers.

After helping to secure 116 countries to co-sponsor a draft resolution calling for an independent review and examination of the origins of COVID-19, the Morrison Government has renewed its push to beef-up the powers of the World Health Organisation.

Health Minister Greg Hunt (pictured) was expected to speak to the World Health Assembly overnight in favour of the draft resolution proposed by the European Union and highlight the need to bolster the power of officials to investigate new diseases.

"We need to learn the lessons from this pandemic and ensure we have the strongest possible global health architecture, with an enhanced ability to prevent and respond to future outbreaks," he was expected to say.

"This could include an examination of whether the WHO's mandate and powers, including around inspection, need to be strengthened to ensure WHO members have timely access to critical data." China denied WHO officials entry into Wuhan for almost a month after the first case of COVID-19 in December, and has remained reluctant to release detailed case data.

Mr Hunt's speech also highlighted the danger of wildlife wet markets. Foreign Minister Marise Payne yesterday confirmed the origins of the coronavirus pandemic - including which animals it passed through before infecting humans - will be examined if world leaders back the "comprehensive" draft resolution.

A motion in the draft resolution requests WHO director general Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus work closely with animal health and agriculture organisations to "identify the zoonotic source of the virus".

It also calls for an examination of "the route of introduction to the human population".

Deputy chief medical officer Professor Paul Kelly said he hoped a coronavirus review would put an end to the international blame game.

"I think the most important thing - rather than apportioning blame to one particular country or another country - is that we get to the bottom of what's happened," he said. While it is possible the pressure of the broad coalition built by Australia will force China's hand to support the review, there remains a chance it will further anger Beijing, which could result in further retaliation on trade.
---
CHINA has sunk to a new low in its propaganda war after a prominent official shared a fake image of an Australian Digger threatening to slit the throat of an Afghan child.

A furious Prime Minister Scott Morrison yesterday condemned the image - created by a self-described "wolf warrior painter" - as "repugnant" saying the Chinese government should be "totally ashamed" and apologise.

The violent image was shared by Beijing's foreign ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian on Twitter. Mr Zhao earlier this year described the Tiananmen Square massacre as simply a "political disturbance" for which the Chinese government's response was "fully correct".

The Australian government also appealed to Twitter directly to remove the "false" image but the social media giant did not respond to -requests about what action it would take.

The picture of a soldier holding a bloodied knife to the throat of an Afghan child covered in an Australian flag and holding a white lamb with the caption "Don't be afraid, we are coming to bring you peace" was reportedly created by a computer graphics artist in China.

In a tweet accompanying the image, Mr Zhao said: "Shocked by murder of Afghan civilians & prisoners by Australian soldiers. We strongly condemn such acts, & call for holding them -accountable".

Slamming the post Mr Morrison said: "It is deeply offensive to every Australian, every Australian who has served in that uniform, every Australian who serves in that uniform today … it is utterly outrageous and can't be justified on any basis whatsoever." Mr Morrison said the Chinese Government should be "totally ashamed of this post".

"It diminishes them in the world's eyes," he said.

The PM said there were undoubtedly tensions between the two nations, but "this is not how you deal with them".

"The way to deal with this is by engaging directly in discussions and dialogue between ministers and leaders," Mr Morrison said.

"Despite this terribly -offensive post, I would ask again and call on China to -re-engage in that dialogue." The Prime Minister said where there were incidents such as those detailed in the Brereton report, Australia dealt with them in a "transparent and open way".

"That is what a free, liberal democratic country does," he said. China has been accused of massacring thousands of citizens in the 1989 pro-democracy crackdown that culminated in tanks in Tiananmen Square.

It has also waged an ongoing campaign of repression against the Muslim ethnic Uighur population of Xinjiang, which human rights campaigners say includes forced sterilisation and mass concentration camps.

Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade secretary Frances Adamson called China's Ambassador to Australia to highlight the government's concerns about the Twitter post, but hours later the image remained online.

Foreign Minister Marise Payne said the tweet was "grossly offensive". "It is an appalling disgusting and outrageous piece of social media," she said. Ms Payne described the image as an example of the "absolute scourge of disinformation and misinformation" on social media. Labor's foreign affairs spokeswoman Penny Wong said she was also outraged and warned the Chinese government it would be judged on the world stage.

"It is gratuitous, inflammatory and it is deeply offensive," she said. "This is not the behaviour of a responsible, mature international power.

"These tactics will be met with unified condemnation in the Australian community." The image had been circulating on Chinese social media for at least six days before it was shared by Mr Zhao, and followed the release of the Brereton Report, which found "credible information" 25 special forces soldiers committed 39 murders of Afghan -civilians.

The artist behind the offensive picture, with the username "wuheqilin", appeared to welcome the endorsement of his image by a Chinese -government official.

Chinese officials last night doubled down with foreign ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying suggesting Mr Morrison's complaint meant Australia believed the war crimes were "justified".

"The Australian side (has) reacted so strongly to my colleague's Twitter, does that mean that they think the cold blood murder of Afghan innocent civilians is justified, while other people's condemnation of such crimes are not justified?" she said.

Diplomatic relations between Australia and China have soured in the past year, with Beijing -targeting a hit list of exports including barley, beef, wine, coal, copper, sugar and seafood. Earlier this month Mr Zhao confirmed the aggressive trade tariffs and attempts to block Australian goods from Chinese ports were in direct response to a list of "grievances" Beijing had with Canberra.

CHINA TENSIONS 19 November, 2019 China launches anti dumping investigation into Australian barley imports. 21 April, 2020 Prime Minister Scott Morrison discusses a probe into the origins of the coronavirus with world leaders.

26 April, 2020 China's Ambassador to the Australia Chinese ambassador Cheng Jingye threatens a boycott of Australian meat, wine and university students after Australia pushes for COVID-19 inquiry.

11 May, 2020 China bans imports from four major Australian meat processing plants. 18 May, 2020 China confirms 80.5 per cent tariff on Australian barley exports following its anti-dumping investigation.

18 August, 2020 China's Ministry of Commerce confirms it has started an anti-dumping investigation into Australian wine imports following a complaint from the China Alcoholic Drinks Association.

31 August, 2020 China announces a countervailing investigation into subsidised Australian wine imports.

31 August, 2020 China halts barley imports from Australia's CBH Grain, because it says harmful weeds were found in the cargoes.

12 October, 2020 China verbally bans Australian thermal and coking coal imports. 16 October, 2020 China "discourages" its spinning mills from using Australian cotton. 30 October, 2020 China customs bans imports of log timber from Queensland and grain imports from Emerald Grain, while it also delays imports of Australian lobster.

6 November, 2020 Australian coal, copper, wine, lobster, timber, sugar subject of verbal bans by China.

12 November, 2020 Chinese foreign ministry spokesman Wang Wenbin says Australia's excessive public criticisms of political issues in Xinjiang, Taiwan and Hong Kong, and its constant slander of China without evidence, has "poisoned" the relationship.

19 November 2020 China's foreign ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian says over the "past few years," Australia had made a "series of wrong moves" that Beijing blames entirely for bilateral tensions. These include criticising China's policies in Hong Kong, Xinjiang and Taiwan, banning Huawei from 5G rollout and advocating for "so-called 'independent international inquiry'" into COVID-19.

28 November, 2020 China imposes temporary anti-dumping tariffs on Australian wine of up to 212.1 per cent.

30 November, 2020 China's foreign ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian posts a false image of Australian soldier holding a knife to Afghan child's throat on Twitter.
---
"COVID-19 turned the world on its head, "destroying hope and taking 1.5 million lives so far. Now, at last, the tide of battle"may be about to turn. David Mills reports"

ALL being well, the global fightback against the coronavirus will finally begin this Thursday, when the first jabs of Pfizer's COVID-19 vaccine are expected to be administered in the US and Britain.

In the US, the vaccinations come as the nation braces for more cases and even more fatalities in the wake of the Thanksgiving holiday, adding to an already gruesome death tally of 271,000. Dr Anthony Fauci, the head of the White House corona-virus Task Force, has warned of a "surge upon a surge" in new cases.

But those jabs should turn the tide of a battle that up until now has been a total bust for the human race.

The virus has been suppressed in a few pockets, such as Australia, New Zealand and Taiwan, but it has rampaged in most places, destroying hopes and taking 1.5 million lives.

Time and again, worst-case scenarios have prevailed. There were optimistic forecasts the virus would fade with the coming of the northern summer, like SARS in 2003; others thought herd immunity or so-called "miracle drugs" like hydroxychloraquixine would eventually stop it. All those hopes came to nought.

A more recent suggestion - that the virus is slowing down - may not hold up to scientific scrutiny either.

"There is no real evidence that the virus has changed massively in terms of its virulence; it's pretty much acting in the same way it has always acted," Melbourne epidemiologist Hassan Vally said.

The Associate Professor from La Trobe University said while the mortality rate was coming down, that might be due to what we are doing, not what the virus is doing.

"If you're testing only those who have severe disease, you'll get a very high mortality rate, and that's certainly what we saw very early on, -especially in places such as Italy that were overwhelmed," he said.

SMOKE AND MIRRORS The origins of the virus are still being contested, but Professor Peter Collingnon, an infectious disease expert at the ANU, says there is compelling evidence that the virus was in Paris in December 2019.

"There's no doubt it was circulating in Wuhan in October/November, and probably earlier," he said. "China must have known it was person-to-person (transmission) by December. They already had the out-break. That misled a lot of people." Beijing also failed to restrict air travel until after the Chinese New Year on January 25, Professor Collingnon said, adding that a flight from Wuhan might have taken the virus to Milan. Italy confirmed its first case on January 29.

There is suspicion Beijing never told the full story. Even today, China claims just over 4600 fatalities, putting it at No. 38 on the tally board of coronavirus deaths per nation.

But whatever China's failures, others argue they were soon compounded by the World Health Organisation and other agencies.

"We have seen the WHO initially denying the pandemic, denying person-to-person transmission, then denying asymptomatic transmission, and then denying airborne transmission, always far behind the scientific evidence," Professor Raina MacIntyre from the University of NSW said.

"We have seen public health agencies suggest that contact tracing was not needed, displaying complete ignorance about the fundamentals of epidemic control. So there has been a lot of smoke and mirrors."

THE HORROR DEEPENS But there was no masking the horror of the virus when it hit Italy. Within two months of the country's first confirmed case, nearly a thousand people were dying every day.

There were shocking images: nurses collapsed from exhaustion, deserted Venetian piazzas, churches filled with coffins. And the horror deepened when it emerged that Italian doctors were being advised to prioritise younger patients over the elderly as intensive care units -became inundated.

The virus quickly metastasised around the globe. Eighteen countries reported cases by the end of January. By mid-March it was 121.

February brought with it a slew of first deaths: Spain and Japan on the 13th; Iran on the 19th; South Korea on the 20th; France on the 26th; the US on the 29th.

And the news only got more shocking. March 8: Italy became the first country to enter full lockdown. March 16: the Dow Jones suffered its biggest drop in history. March 24: Japan postponed the Tokyo Olympics. Landmark locations around the world emptied as lockdowns became ubiquitous and tourism ground to a halt. From Tokyo's Shibuya Crossing to St Peter's Square in Rome and New York's Times Square, public spaces became eerily deserted.

THE ABSENCE OF HUMANS Airline passenger numbers dropped by nearly 2.9 billion for the year, prompting major airlines to stop -operations. The cruise industry dropped anchor entirely after a string of disasters, most notably a failed quarantine on board the Diamond Princess while it sat off the port of Yokohama; in the end nearly 20 per cent of its 3700 passengers and crew would test positive.

Global carbon emissions dropped by 17 per cent by April, according to Australia's CSIRO, while NASA satellite photos showed remarkable -improvements in air quality. India's Taj Mahal looked its best in years after a 60 per cent drop in pollution.

The absence of humans created effects that nobody saw coming. Coyotes were spotted on the streets of San Francisco, while in Thailand, the drop in tourist numbers led to mass brawls among the monkey population for food scraps.

Celebrities testing positive provided further shocks. First it was Tom Hanks and Rita Wilson on March 11, then Prince Charles on March 25, and then Boris Johnson on March 27.

The British Prime Minister's near-death experience was just one dramatic moment in a year of them. The UK chose first not to rush into harsh lockdowns, arguing compliance fatigue would weaken the -effect of tough measures when they were needed most, before abandoning the strategy as cases and deaths skyrocketed. According to data from Johns Hopkins University, the UK has the third-worst case to fatality ratio, behind Mexico and Iran.

AMERICA THE GRAVE Sweden's light-touch response to the outbreak was hailed by some commentators who despaired as the world's economies nosedived - but the experiment was a failure, said Professor Vally.

"The other countries in Scandinavia are about a similar size, and all of them went into lockdown and Sweden didn't, so you can compare the outcome - and pretty much on every measure Sweden has done worse, and in terms of death it's done terribly," he said.

Others might point to the US under Donald Trump as the perfect -example of how not to respond to a pandemic.

March 31 modelling predicted US -fatalities could end up being between 100,000 and 240,000, but that upper limit was surpassed in November, and it is still climbing rapidly.

While Trump was criticised for downplaying the seriousness of the outbreak, suggesting untested cures, criticising the scientists who could assist in the fight, and singlehand-edly turning mask-wearing into a party-political statement, it should be noted that popular rallies on both the left (for Black Lives Matter) and the right (against state lockdowns) probably contributed to the further spread of the disease.

And Trump's COVID-19 res-ponse was not unique. Brazil's Jair Bolsanaro and Mexico's Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador were slammed for failing to slow the disease as death tolls shot up. In a November press conference, Bolsanaro chided Brazilians for being "a country of sissies" because "everyone is going to die".

While Trump himself fought off the virus not long after he tested positive in October, COVID-19 would play a massive role in his electoral defeat on November 3.

One week later, the first results of final vaccine trials filtered through, offering real hope for the first time in 2020. But the situation remains -desperate in most countries.

TRIUMPH OF SCIENCE Second national lockdowns ended in UK and France this week, but new cases per day were still over 4000 in the former and 12,000 in the latter. (England will instead move to a three-tier system of restrictions.) Spain, Italy, Turkey and Lebanon have all implemented curfews, while Germany is continuing its partial lockdown.

With global infections still going up at more than half a million every day, all hopes are pinned on the vaccines. Professor Vally said their speedy arrival would vindicate science at the end of a year in which it has been tested like never before.

"There have been a lot of vocal anti-science people, but they are in the minority and people have shown when there is a threat like this, they want to hear from scientists, and people respected politicians who -deferred to the scientists," he said. "To get these vaccines in the time that they have taken so far has been nothing short of brilliant. And that's taken scientists, governments and pharmaceutical companies to all work together for the greater good."
---
Australia is enduring economic challenges because China cannot cope with our demands for an investigation into the origins of the coronavirus.

For a mob that wishes to be perceived as a major global influence, China's communist dictatorship is remarkably petty and thin-skinned.

To this point, China has already put tariffs or embargoes on numerous Australian exports. Unable to deal with Australia on anything like a serious diplomatic level, China instead uses brute economic force.

It's the dictatorship's only negotiating tactic. We either run quiet on the origins of the corona-virus, and the need to understand the source in case of future outbreaks, or China will hurt our farmers, winegrowers and broader agricultural sector.

Thankfully, the Australian government has refused to yield, despite China's latest vindictive move - cutting Australian wheat imports to the lowest level since 2011.

This strategy seems especially targeted, considering the bumper wheat crop for Australian farmers. Forecasts tip a 31 million tonne result, nearly double the previous outcome.

Besides our farmers, the biggest losers out of this will be China's own citizens. They are already paying over the odds for other high-quality Australian products and now will be pushed financially towards second-rate grain.

In that light, it is worth considering how China might behave towards Australia if it had greater punitive powers over us than barriers to trade.

For example, just look at how China is treating one of its own citizens after she sought to investigate the beginnings of COVID-19 in Wuhan.

Former lawyer turned citizen journalist Zhang Zhan travelled to the pandemic epicentre in February, and subsequently reported on the detention of other like-minded independent journalists by Chinese authorities.

Additionally, Zhang reported government harassment of families of coronavirus victims who demanded accountability.

Then China's tyrants stepped in. Zhang was arrested in May.

Charged in early November with "picking quarrels and provoking trouble" and "causing the public order to be seriously chaotic", Zhang has now been sentenced. She will be imprisoned for four years - for reporting.
---
ACADEMIC research into the origins of coronavirus will have to be vetted by government officials before it can be published, according to a disturbing report from China.

Two Chinese universities posted government directives stipulating all research into the origins of the virus were to be vetted by authorities.

The online posts by Fudan University in Shanghai and China University of Geoscience in Wuhan were deleted after CNN made inquiries. Cached versions of the documents remain online.

The directives mandate that papers on the origin of COVID-19 be "strictly and tightly managed", involving oversight from the university administration and a task force of the State Council, according to CNN.

Professor Clive Hamilton (left), author of the book Silent Invasion: China's InfluenceIn Australia, said the directive follows earlier propaganda efforts by Beijing to "control the narrative" by promulgating "outlandish theories" about the origin of the virus. According to one of these stories, the virus was brought to China by US troops, while according to another the virus originated in Italy.

"It's very consistent with the news that we've been getting out of China for a couple of months now," he said.

"Chinese scientists have been publishing world-leading information on the virus, its nature and it origin, and they have been silenced and disciplined. Some have gone off the radar, so that has meant that the world is deprived of important information about COVID-19."The reported origin of COVID-19 in the live animal markets of Wuhan has proved a touchy issue for Beijing, with US President Donald Trump's repeated use of the term "Chinese virus" in press conferences prompting a telephone call from Chinese President Xi Jinping on March 26.
---
A WORLD Health Organisation investigation into the origins of COVID-19 - first detected in the Chinese city of Wuhan more than a year ago - has failed to get off the ground with the UN body complaining that Beijing was blocking its team from entering the country.

The WHO announced that after months of preparation, its experts had begun travelling to China - only to be told that there were problems with their visas. "I am very disappointed with this news, given that two members had already begun their journeys," said WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus in a rare castigation of Beijing.

A 10-strong team was due to arrive in China this week after months of painstaking negotiations.

Beijing is determined to control the origin story of the virus, which has killed more than 1.8 million people so far.

The first cases of the coronavirus were recorded in the central Chinese city of Wuhan in late 2019, prompting accusations of chaotic, secretive handling by Chinese authorities which led to its spread beyond China.

But Beijing has so far resisted pressure for a full independent probe into the early days of the outbreak. Instead, it has seeded doubt as to whether the pandemic even started inside its borders at all.

The WHO mission was billed as a way to cut through the rancour and seek clear answers on how the virus jumped from animals to humans. But with some of the team already in transit, Beijing had yet to grant them entry, the WHO chief confirmed.
---
AUSTRALIA'S success flattening the coronavirus curve has prompted an invite to a special group for nations moving to reopen their economy.

The group - known as the "first movers" - is made up of countries deemed to have achieved relative success suppressing the COVID-19 pandemic and are now focused on easing restrictions.

Australia was invited to the group by Austrian Chancellor Sebastian Kurz (pictured) and joins an eclectic collection of countries including Denmark, Israel, New Zealand, Greece and the Czech Republic.

Prime Minister Scott Morrison dialled into the group's second official meeting last night to share Australia's progress in combating the health crisis and its plans to reopen parts of the economy.

It is understood international leaders have been particularly interested in Australia's success building up a strong testing and contact tracing capacity - including through the COVIDSafe app - as well as the co-operation achieved through the National Cabinet. While the group is yet to discuss Australia's hopes for an independent review of the COVID-19 outbreak, it is understood the idea has broad support as the European nations already have a similar motion going to the World Health Assembly this month.

Australia will support the EU-sponsored draft resolution on the "COVID-19 Response" and its call for an independent evaluation to consolidate lessons from the pandemic, when it goes before the Assembly on May 18.China has lashed out at the calls by Australia for a review into the origins of the crisis.
---
Amid subdued commemorations of the 250th anniversary of James Cook's landing, the Enlightenment explorer is still making waves, writes James Morrow

It's fair to say that this year's commemorations of James Cook's arrival have not gone according to plan.

Thanks to COVID-19, there were no fireworks, no speeches, none of the hullabaloo that would normally accompany the 250th anniversary of the English explorer, navigator, map maker and scientist's arrival at Botany Bay last Wednesday.

About the only predictable thing that remained were the culture wars around Cook, which flared up on Thursday when the somewhat ironically named Annaleise van Diemen - Deputy Chief Medical Officer of Victoria - tweeted her thoughts about the event.

"Sudden arrival of an invader from another land, decimating populations, creating terror. Forces the population to make enormous sacrifices & completely change how they live in order to survive", van Diemen wrote, adding, "COVID-19 or Cook 1770?" It's a far cry from celebrations marking the 200th anniversary of Cook's landing in 1970. Then, even the New York Times got in on the act, with a travel feature advising readers 1970 would be "a special year for a trip to Australia".

"Colourful observances commemorating the great British navigator's historic explorations in 1770 will be held in Sydney and numerous other picturesque Australian cities and towns. A highlight in Sydney will be an international exposition, Panorama Of The Pacific from March 20 to March 30. Many countries with shores on the Pacific Ocean will participate in the show," the Times' Robert Trumbull wrote.

"Advance reservations indicate that thousands of overseas visitors will attend various events affiliated with the year-long Cook bicentenary celebration." So how did things change so much in fifty years? Why has Cook gone from hero to - at least in some quarters - hate figure? And who was Captain James Cook?

Humble origins While indigenous Australians have proudly lived on this land for tens of thousands of years, there is a strong case to be made that, even though federation would not occur for over a century, James Cook was the first modern Australian.

Like so many Australians, Cook was every bit the self-made man, not bound by the class boundaries and limitations of the old country but rather restless and determined to make his own way in the world.

When he was born, on October 27, 1728, the son of a Scottish farmhand in the hardly glamorous precinct of Marton-on-Cleveland, Yorkshire, there was no indication of what his life would hold.

Leaving school at the age of 12 to work as a farmhand alongside his father, then as an assistant in a nearby village shop, Cook would eventually be apprenticed to the owner of a small fleet of coal ships.

There, he would discover his passion not just for the sea (he spent most of the following nine years on the water), but for self-improvement, using the winter months when his master's vessels were laid up to study navigation and mathematics.

It was during this time, he would later write, that he formed what he would in 1774 describe (while an ice field closed in around his ship deep in the Antarctic) an "ambition not only to go farther than any one had done before, but as far as it was possible for man to go".

James King, who accompanied Cook on his third voyage, noted Cook's extraordinary personality, writing: "it's most distinguishing feature was that unremitting perseverance in the pursuit of his object, which was not only superior to the opposition of dangers, and the pressure of hardships, but even exempt from the want of ordinary relaxation." A man of his age Whereas in the previous age of exploration, sea captains set out in the service of God and country (hoping to sail home laden to the gunwales with treasure), Cook was a creature of the Enlightenment age, which elevated science and scientific discovery above all.

It was, in short, an era made for a man like Cook who - according to his biographer JC Beaglehole, who edited all three of Cook's journals of exploration - had "no politics" and "no religion".

Instead, Beaglehole says Cook had "the genius of the matter of fact. He was profoundly competent in his calling as seaman. He was completely professional in his trade as explorer. He had, in large part, the sceptical mind: he did not like taking on trust. He was therefore the great dispeller of illusion." It's a point underlined by Gregory Melleuish, associate professor of history and politics at the University of Wollongong, who says people far too often believe Cook was a conqueror, when really he was an explorer.

"Cook was a scientist. He was in charge of a scientific expedition. They were here to map things in the South Pacific, collect plants, that sort of thing - he wasn't coming to Australia to conquer," says Melleuish, who notes that one of the things they did on their voyage to Australia was to observe the astronomical phenomenon known as the transit of Venus.

"They were part of the new scientific world of the 18th century, and among the educated classes of England at the time, there was an increasing interest in that - even George III was in to clocks." Celebrated - or reviled, as the case may be - in Australia mainly for mapping eastern Australia, and proving that Australia and New Guinea were in fact two separate landmasses, Cook's journey celebrated the best Enlightenment values, which sought to erase distinctions of race and class.

When Cook and his men sailed from Plymouth on the journey that would take them to Australia, he received a series of "hints" from James Douglas, Earl of Morton and head of the Royal Society.

Douglas advised Cook "to exercise the utmost patience and forbearance with respect to the natives of the several lands where the ship may touch. To check the petulance of the sailors, and restrain the wanton use of fire arms. To have it still in view that shedding the blood of those people is a crime of the highest nature. They are human creatures, the work of the same -omnipotent author, equally under His care with the most polished -European; perhaps being less -offensive, more entitled to his favour … should they in a hostile manner oppose the landing and kill some men in the attempt, even this would hardly justify firing upon them until every other gentle -method had been tried." And while Cook's landing at Botany Bay wasn't as peaceful, there is ample evidence that Cook took these words to heart - even, in June 1770, meeting with local elders in what would become far north Queensland to negotiate, as best they could, over taking turtles from the reef to feed his men while repairing the Endeavour.

This humanity, and a love of the latest scientific equipment of his day, helped make Cook's success as a captain and navigator. In his later voyage of 1772-75, Cook would use a chronometer to determine his ship's longitude.

Determined to prevent scurvy, he experimented with every sort of fruit, vegetable or grass he could find and convince his crew to eat.

He was also a shrewd reader of his crew. One story has it that to get his reluctant men to try sauerkraut as a potential remedy against scurvy, he gave it social status by serving it only in the officers' mess.

Soon it was so popular on board it had to be rationed.

Turning of the tide So how is it that Cook's reputation has become so, to borrow a word from academia, problematic?

It's a problem Melleuish has puzzled over, but he suggests that things started to change around the 1988 Australian bicentennial, which was marked by protests and alternative histories.

"It all has to do with the Aboriginal question, and it's the same thing with the attacks on Australia Day," Melleuish says. "It's the argument about settlement versus invasion - that's another form it takes - which is all about the meaning of individual words." Add to this an Australian curriculum that is hazy on early Australian history and leaves many conflating Cook's expedition - which was entirely scientific in nature - with the First Fleet, and it's easy to see how people like Victoria's Dr van Diemen might get things confused.

"The point she may have been trying to make is that when the First Fleet turned up, so did smallpox. But Cook had nothing to do with that, and there is no evidence that he brought smallpox.

"A lot of people have a very hazy concept of Australian history and events," Melleuish says.

And, more broadly, people tend to forget that Australian exploration in the South Pacific was also driven by ongoing conflict in Europe between England and France, which was also exploring - as the existence of the Sydney suburb of La Perouse reminds us.

"Who knows, if Britain had been successful in the Americas, maybe they wouldn't have felt compelled to go to Australia," Melleuish speculates."But there was a constant war between Britain and France - the Seven Years War was really the first 'world war' - so whatever happened, one of those two powers would have been interested in this place."
---
When the deputy chief health officer of Victoria calls Captain Cook an invader and likens him to COVID-19, we have a history problem. When two of our leading business figures oppose an inquiry into the origins of the coronavirus because it might hurt our trade with China, we have a self-respect problem.

And when the same Premiers that demand we must all "heed the science on climate-change" reject the science on children going back school, we have a credibility problem.

Recovering from a corona crisis that will kill off tens of thousands of businesses, hundreds of thousands of jobs and hundreds of billions in national wealth will demand a comprehensive reset in the way we approach our country's problems.

For the first time in decades, Australia faces real hardship and, to get through it, we can't afford any more of the indulgent thinking that's held us back.

All credit to the Morrison government for protecting Australia from the many thousands of deaths that this virus has caused in Britain, Europe, the US and elsewhere.

I'm not one of those who want to criticise them for locking us, and the economy, up in order to save lives; it's lousy to want to punish our country's success. But getting the economy back on track is likely to make the health effort look easy.

Last week, Roy Morgan estimated a staggering 10.5 million Australians have had a change to their employment due to this virus: 3.8 million have had their hours reduced, 2.7 million have been stood down, 1.4 million have had their pay cut and almost 700,000 have been made redundant. The PM said on Friday that restrictions can now start to ease but it will be a long time before this virus has worked its way out of the economy. And that's why the sooner we stop focusing on "First World problems" and get Australians back to work, the better.

Key in all of this has to be rebuilding manufacturing in this country - and, given high power prices are making the few industries we have left more and more marginal, fixing our energy mess remains an urgent priority.

For all the billionaires like Twiggy Forrest demanding the Prime Minister let China off the hook over this virus, let's not forget it's these same business types who contracted out to China all the things we used to make here for ourselves - putting balance sheet profit ahead of national security.

Yet there was Forrest last week, holding another dubious press conference to crow about importing goods from China that we used to manufacture here, then stinging the taxpayer hundreds of millions to reimburse him.

Is it any wonder people are angry about how economically dependent we have made ourselves on China - how much of our farming land, energy and water companies, ports, roads, agricultural processing plants and heaven knows what else we have sold off? While big business might have turned a blind eye to the Chinese Communist Party's longer-term agenda, the ordinary public are awake to it.

Last year, only 32 per cent of Australians told a Lowy Institute poll they trusted China to act "responsibly" - a 20-point fall on a year earlier, and this was before the coronavirus. And 74 per cent agreed Australia was "too economically dependent" on China too.

Convincing Australians we need to make more here won't be such a challenge. But it might be more difficult to get them to understand that, in order to achieve this, we must get rid of stifling rules and regulations that make operating a business here so hard.

So much of our green and red tape comes from bogus international agreements and bodies that politicians sign up to strike a pose without properly understanding the impact.

By all means, we must have laws in this country to protect our magnificent environment but those laws should be a reflection of what Australian voters decide is appropriate to strike the balance between new dams, power stations and development with whatever local frog is at risk, or the farce of punishing us for emissions caused overseas by our coal being burned there. With well over a doubling of unemployment and a 10 per cent drop in GDP likely, persisting with the regulatory delays that have typically held up major projects looks like economic self-harm.

The federal government knows (even if the states mostly do not) that a strong recovery from this corona crisis means lower taxes and less regulation, as well as a much more hard-headed approach to foreign investment, and self-reliance in strategic manufacturing.

A concern, though, are signals out of Canberra wanting a "consensus" on reform and suggesting the so-called National Cabinet might be the best way to achieve it.

The National Cabinet has worked well when the PM signs a big cheque but not so well when he doesn't. So far, the National Cabinet hasn't even been able to achieve a consensus on sending kids back to school, let alone hugely contentious issues like tax reform. If everything has to be achieved by agreement with Labor premiers, then the bar is set low. We might end up with a tougher line on foreign investment and maybe government intervention in strategic industries but there's no way we'll get the greater economic reforms needed to get our economy back on its feet, and to start paying back the trillion-dollar debt left over from this crisis.

It's leadership, not consensus, that's needed to make a difference on hard issues. We only have a consensus now on border protection, for example, because the Coalition was prepared for a colossal fight to stop the boats. And this was only possible because orders could be given to the Navy that didn't first require legislation in the Senate or the agreement of the states.

As things stand now, dams, power, planning, infrastructure, environmental regulation, public schools and public hospitals are all the legal responsibility of the states even if they are increasingly the political responsibility of the Commonwealth. Yet who really holds the states to account? Beyond maybe the premier, who can name relevant state ministers or even the opposition leader and how many of us actually understand how deeply in debt our states really are?

Since 2007, according to the Australian Election Study, our "satisfaction with democracy" has dropped 27 points to just 59 per cent. Much more than the revolving door prime ministership, my sense is that this is due to our national inability to get things done. Of all the things that must change after COVID-19, this is No.1.

THUMBS UP Retiring NSW fire chief Shane Fitzsimmons, who now moves to a new disaster recovery role. He hasn't forgotten there's still a lot to do for bushfire victims, even if others have.

THUMBS DOWNBillionaires who put self-interest before the national interest. You know who you are.
---
AUSSIE wheat farmers have become the latest victims of China's vendetta against our nation, with the communist state slashing its Australian wheat imports to an almost 10-year low.

It comes as Beijing ramps up its attack on Australian farm commodities and threatens to disrupt international trade worth hundreds of millions of dollars a year.

China imported 880 tonnes of Australian wheat in November - the lowest amount since 2011 - according to customs data, as tensions between Beijing and Canberra show no signs of abating.

Australia exports about $4.6 billion worth of wheat a year globally, with China accounting for about 10 per cent of it.

Beijing's tightening on Australian wheat comes amid a blockbuster crop for Australian farmers, with production forecast to more than double this season to about 31 million tonnes, according to the Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics (ABARE).

China's communist regime has already slapped punitive tariffs or banned a range of Australian products from barley, timber and beef, to wine and seafood after Scott Morrison sought an inquiry into the origins of COVID-19. editorial p58, business p60-61
---
IF COVID-19 hadn't hit, game one of State of Origin would've been played last Wednesday in Adelaide.

Instead, under the NRL's revised draw, we must wait until November 4 to see NSW and Queensland collide.

That's the best news Nathan Cleary could ever hear because, right now, Parramatta's Mitchell Moses is leading the marathon to wear the prized No.7 Blues jumper that Cleary wore in Origins I and II last year.

If NSW coach Brad Fittler had to pick his side tomorrow, Moses would be his seven from heaven.

That's the problem with missing games in the NRL, you're quickly forgotten. Loyalty can only last so long.

Cleary's two-game suspension for breaking the game's coronavirus -protocols has left him chasing form, -respect - and Moses.

Like the rest of us, the Panthers playmaker has watched the return of footy unfold from his living room - -albeit, hopefully by himself.

He would've watched the obvious -elevation of Moses' game in 2020 to a near-complete halfback highlight package of kick-control, intensity, energy, awareness and as Steve "Blocker" Roach said on Fox League last night, "a desire to always be in the game".

While there's still work to be done, Moses has finally found the balance of knowing when to pull the trigger and when to play safe.

Last night, he picked and prodded at the Manly defence, be it through his two tackle busts and offload, or a chip-and-chase to keep Manly fullback Tom Trbojevic thinking.

His 74th minute field goal to give the Eels a psychological edge was exactly what was required. The fact that Moses is combining with a 19-year-old rookie in Dylan Brown, speaks to the halfback's level of maturity and leadership of the Eels.

Make no mistake, Moses' direction of this quality Parramatta side is the very reason they wake this morning having achieved their best start to a season since 1989.

Fittler has always been a Moses fan having coached the precocious talent when representing Lebanon at the 2017 World Cup.

So impressed was he with Moses' ability to absorb pressure, when naturally Lebanon were outclassed by their NRL-stacked opponents, that Fittler claimed the now 25-year-old was "designed for State of Origin".

That was three years ago when Moses had played 67 NRL games for the Wests Tigers. Last night was game 134 of his career and 68 for the Eels.

He is now just four games away from becoming the first halfback to play more than 71 games in the Eels' No. 7 jumper since Peter Sterling retired 28 years ago.

His 69th game in the blue and gold comes on Friday night against Penrith. Over to you, Mr Cleary.
---
DATA SECURITY THE security of data in the COVIDSafe app has been questioned by Australian IT companies, which were passed over for a foreign-owned company that was awarded a lucrative government contract to build the contact-tracing app and manage the database.

The contract to host the sensitive data in the cloud was controversially awarded to foreign-owned US giant Amazon Web Services, despite at least three Australian companies hoping to tender for the project: Vault, Macquarie Government and Sliced Tech.

The government yesterday denied claims this week by Labor MP Ed Husic that Amazon planned to store the information in a Chinese-owned data centre it manages, Global Switch in Pyrmont.

Instead, iTWire reported the COVIDSafe data would be held in the Australian National Data Store, which "is a secured and encrypted data store hosted by AWS in Australia".

The decision to award the contract to Amazon was made after the COVIDSafe project was removed from the Health Department's Digital Health Agency and placed under the control of powerful Home Affairs boss Mike Pezzullo.

"Why did they lock out Australian companies from where the data resides in the country?" asked one irate Australian IT company representative who was blindsided by the Amazon contract.

"Why didn't the Australian Digital Health agency, which was set up specifically by the government to manage Australians' health data, run the tender?" he asked. He also queried why decisions about sensitive personal data should be handled by the same department that runs both the Australian Federal Police and intelligence services.

Even without Chinese involvement, data hosting by a foreign-owned company still raised issues of "sovereignty and security", he said.

Also yesterday, US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo praised Australia's call for an independent inquiry into the origins of the coronavirus.

It comes after China's ruling Communist Party angrily dismissed Canberra's calls for an investigation into how COVID-19 spread from the Chinese city of Wuhan.

Mr Pompeo, who has piled pressure on China over the pandemic, waded into the dispute on Wednesday as he sarcastically said that Australia upset Beijing through its "temerity" in asking questions.

"Who in the world wouldn't want an investigation of how this happened to the world?" Mr Pompeo told reporters in Washington.

"The solution to this crisis will come from freedom-loving people around the world.

"I'm very confident that authoritarian regimes are poorly designed to deal with the kind of crisis that this pandemic has engendered," he said.

He said he was "heartened" to see Australia and other countries joining US calls for an independent investigation.Mr Pompeo added: "While we know this started in Wuhan, China, we don't yet know from where it started and in spite of our best efforts to get experts on the ground, they continue to try and hide."
---
What's the worst thing you've seen on Instagram? Influencers flogging diet products? Photo shoots for pets? For the algorithm masters at the platform, it's nudity - specifically the nipple.

Ten years on from its launch and over one billion users later, Instagram still hasn't freed the nipple for its female users. But it has allowed the anti-vax movement to flourish.

In recent years, anti-vaxxers have slowly begun migrating from Facebook to Instagram (both companies are owned by Mark Zuckerberg, a CEO infamous for his reluctance to take action against spreaders of misinformation on either of his multi-billion dollar platforms). In recent months, their accounts have risen in popularity and follower count at an alarming speed thanks to their enthusiastic sharing of scientifically disproved theories on the origins, spread, and death rates of the coronavirus, which range from blaming 5G towers and Bill Gates for the virus, to suggesting vitamin C, silver and bleach as cures.

As of right now in Australia, the most notable peddler of corona-misinformation is Pete Evans, a chef with 235,000 followers and a penchant for vague captions like "who wants to go down the rabbit hole?" and hashtags like #nevergofullscience.

For the most part, users like Evans have circumvented Instagram's community guidelines by posting open-ended questions like "could this be true?", and using platform-friendly hashtags like #justasking to avoid detection. And until COVID-19, Instagram kept an eye on the movement and removed the occasional user. For the most part the growing community was left alone.

But with a global pandemic came an update to community guidelines across all major social platforms. YouTube, owned by Google, recognised the potential dangers early in the coronavirus outbreak and acted fast, announcing misinformation and con-spiracy theories would be removed. YouTube partnered with popular users to spread scientifically endorsed PSAs on how to keep safe, and provided links to authoritative sources in its home feed, under videos related to -coronavirus, and in searches.

But as seems to be a painful pattern, Facebook and Instagram appear less committed to actually enacting the guidelines. Facebook removed a post from Evans in April after the TGA fined him $25,000 for claims he made about a "biocharger", but last week Evans was back on Instagram talking about the biocharger again. Evans has also been busy misinforming his followers about COVID-19's fatality rate.

On May 21, Evans claimed the fatality rate was 1 per cent, when it was actually 6.5 per cent.

Two days later, he shared a post claiming the fatality rate was actually closer to 0.26 per cent.

Over 360,000 people have died from COVID-19. Those percentage differences, and Evans's blatant lack of regard for accurate information, matters. His willingness to spread lies when people's lives are at risk matters. His potential breach of guidelines matters. Instagram's response matters.

My worst ever Insta-moment? A chef turned TV star with no scientific or medical training saying the "overall death rate is meaningless". Much worse than a nipple.
---
If Mathias Cormann leaves politics, a lot will be up for grabs in the Morrison cabinet

The last prime minister to enjoy as long a period of stable leadership as Scott Morrison was John Howard.

Since Morrison took the reins from Malcolm Turnbull in August 2018, his transformation into a revered Liberal leader commanding authority over his party is indisputable.

Serious disunity, while always lurking around the corner, has for two years been latent, not disturbing Morrison's prime ministership.

The unexpected election win gave him crucial gravitas and respect he lacked as treasurer, while his handling of COVID-19 has reinforced his party's confidence in his ability to govern the country soundly.

Australia's success in keeping infections and deaths relatively low is attributable in no small part to Morrison's judgment.

By responding to the coronavirus so decisively, he addressed his leadership weakness over the summer bushfire months.

Significantly, Morrison has also showed his team that, despite his natural tendency for arrogance, he is willing to learn from his mistakes.

He proved his global leadership credentials in his early call for an inquiry into the origins of COVID-19, before successfully lobbying leaders around the world to support it.

Leading calls for an international inquiry would have been a role well-suited to the British Prime Minister, who was indisposed in hospital, or the US president, who has been fighting his own battles.

It was an unprecedented diplomatic success for Australia, elevating Morrison on the international stage.

Morrison has been deliberate in two other ways that has kept his leadership stable.

Firstly, he defends his MPs when they're under siege, such as Angus Taylor and Gladys Liu, showing he's happy to take a bullet for them - as long as it's not fatal.

Secondly, while there are times the government has had to walk on eggshells, Morrison does not muzzle MPs or force them to stick to official Liberal Party policy.

As is fairly evident from my Sky News program, Liberal backbenchers have more freedom to speak on issues than their Labor colleagues. The topics of China and superannuation are two examples.

Now, as restrictions lift and Morrison emerges from crisis mode, senior Liberal sources say early discussions are taking place about whether 2020 is the year for a cabinet reshuffle.

The discussions are not well advanced, but they are certainly happening at a senior level, with the Prime Minister speaking to his closest confidantes about the timing of a potential reshuffle.

The most likely timing discussed for a cabinet refresh is after the Federal Budget in October however there is also a small window after the Eden Monaro by-election.

There are some senior figures urging Morrison to shift Peter Dutton from his beloved Home Affairs portfolio in a potential reshuffle and "promote" him to Defence, replacing Linda Reynolds.

If David Coleman decides not to return to Canberra, Morrison will need to decide on a permanent replacement for the immigration portfolio.

It is understood Mathias Cormann's departure is looking more likely later this year after the budget, which he is involved in as Finance Minister.

Cormann has strongly denied plans to leave politics when speculation has surfaced in the past, but he is not denying it now. He is declining to comment about his future and whether he is leaving this year, including whether he has accepted a role at the OECD.

A Liberal MP said Cormann has been to-ing and fro-ing on his political future for some time now.

"There's been speculation about Mathias going for a fair period of time which hasn't transpired so it's left everybody confused about what his intentions are," he said.

"The logical person to move up into the leadership role when he does go is Simon Birmingham." Turnbull has acknowledged it was a mistake to include Dutton and Cormann in his praetorian guard.

When it came to the crunch, they were not there to truly protect him as PM. It's extraordinary now to reflect on how Turnbull sought Dutton and Cormann's counsel on all manner of policy areas to keep them close.

This infuriated Morrison during federal budget preparations when, as Treasurer, he had his plans overruled by the pair, particularly when Dutton did not hold a treasury portfolio.

This resulted in a front page in The Daily Telegraph with an angry looking Morrison demanding, "Give me Back My Budget." It was a front page that infuriated Morrison even more than the budget powerplay. Now, Morrison is clear-eyed about his rivals. He won't repeat Turnbull's mistakes and has elevated factional allies and trusted confidants into key positions to keep them close.

Stuart Robert is in cabinet as NDIS Minister, Alex Hawke is International Development and the Pacific Minister while Ben Morton is the Assistant Minister to the Prime Minister and Cabinet, giving him a legitimate reason to be in Canberra to advise Morrison.

But this is what conservative Liberals now fear the most: that if Cormann leaves politics, it will be factional heavyweight Hawke who benefits through an elevation to cabinet.

While this would cause factional unrest, those close to the Prime Minister remind him that Dutton and Cormann cannot be trusted, and he needs to keep his supporters close, particularly in the run-up to a federal election that Morrison is determined to win.

It's fascinating to read an article Morrison wrote nearly 20 years ago for the NSW Young Liberal magazine when he was state director.

"There are no longer unlosable and unwinnable elections," he commented. "Government will not return or remain with any Party as a matter of course.

"In short, the political contest is very much alive and always there for the taking." His article concluded with the rousing cry that winning government at a federal and state level was "all up for grabs - let's get on with it." This belief every election can be won clearly underpins his view on politics and explains his ferocious appetite for defeating Bill Shorten in a contest most thought was over.

With Anthony Albanese struggling by the day, Morrison must presume the greatest threat to his prime ministership is from within his team. A reshuffle in which his supporters are elevated goes a long way to securing a lengthy tenure in the top job that we haven't seen since the Howard years.
---
ACTING Prime Minister Michael McCormack has backed World Health Organisation investigators to "get the answers they need" despite fears China will attempt to impede a probe into the coronavirus.

The World Health Organisation's (WHO) international team has touched down in Wuhan, China to investigate the origins of COVID-19, first detected in the city in late 2019.

Australia called for the investigation in April, a move widely viewed as triggering months of escalating trade tensions -between Canberra and Beijing.

Mr McCormack downplayed suggestions the WHO's arrival would hamper efforts to mend relations. "Our phone lines are always open, our doors are always open (to Beijing)," he said. "As far as diplomatic relations with China and trade are concerned, I know how important it is for producers … to ensure we continue our trade with China, which is worth $149.6 billion." Concerns have been raised over Beijing's willingness to allow a transparent investigation after it temporarily blocked investigators from entering, citing visa approval issues.

Mr McCormack would not be drawn on whether Beijing would attempt to impede the probe but backed WHO to conduct its work "very diligently".

"I'm sure that the WHO, being the robust organisation that it is, will make sure that its inquiries are what they need to be," he said. "They will … undertake their work in the most professional manner. I'm sure they'll come up with the answers they need." Mr McCormack also pushed back against one of the more bizarre salvos in the trade stoush after Beijing criticised Australian cherries for being "inferior … in taste and quality" compared with their Chilean equivalents.

"(Australian cherries) are the best. You want to get stuck into them, they're great: red, juicy and plump," he said. World page 72
---
Crowning argument a winner THE inquiry commissioner Patricia Bergin's adverse report on Crown's current management running the Barangaroo Crown Casino, due, in part, to links to money laundering and criminal syndicates involved in "junkets", brings a question mark over other casino operations, including The Star Casino, Sydney; Crown Casino in Melbourne and the Crown Burswood Casino in Perth (Casino too much of a gamble, 10/2).

 If a similar inquiry was run against these casinos, would the inquiry commissioner find the same or similar issues?

Keith Range, Winston Hills

THE correlation between casinos and corruption has been understood for decades yet it would appear that the backroom deal between Barry O'Farrell then NSW Premier and Jamie Packer in 2012 giving Crown inside running without scrutiny is just grist for the mill (Casino too much of a gamble, 10/2. The rest, of course, is now history after the Bergin report concerning Crown in NSW.

 It should be noted that many of the references relating to unconscionable conduct have been derived from Crown operations in Victoria, apparently under the noses of Victorian regulators who have neither seen, heard or spoken about such matters.

Greg Angelo, Balwyn North, Vic

WHO, when, why and how unanswered So the World Health Organisation (WHO) has found it difficult to find conclusive evidence on the origins of COVID-19 (WHO fails virus test, 10/2).

 Some of that uncertainty would be due to the lengthy period of time taken to investigate the situation and stalling tactics applied by the Chinese government.

 The W.H.O. has formed an opinion of WHEN the virus was exposed; it cannot be sure HOW it was released, WHERE it actually came from, or WHO is responsible.

 Most of the world understands WHY the virus was unleashed, but perhaps not WHY organisations like the W.H.O. are necessary.

 In this current pandemic, they have been found wanting on a number of fronts, notably any form of true leadership in difficult times.

Geoff Simmonds, Strathfield South

State of play Daniel Andrews has the gall to say his COVID systems are superior to NSW (Infections make mockery of Dan's defence, 10/2).

 Who presided over the more than 800 deaths, who had a Health Minister resign in disgust at the way the quarantine hotels were being managed, who had an inquiry into the debacle and nobody could recall who had responsibility for the problem, who closed his borders requiring everyone to obtain a permit to enter, whose state racked up another three infections this week, who refuses to share the load of incoming passengers in his hotels, who uses spin over substance and who wants his residents to think he is doing a good job when most of us know that he isn't.

 Please Mr Andrews have another look at the efficient way Gladys Berejiklian is managing our state before you sprout your political waffle. Our Premier is correct in not lowering herself to respond to his nonsense.

Marg Swindells, Castle Hill

Reassurance needed As I remember it, the government's solution to reducing COVID cases in quarantine was to reduce arrival numbers for four weeks and require travellers to provide proof of a negative test result before boarding a plane to Australia from January 22. Before arrival numbers increase from February 15, how about the government assures us that the required testing at departure airports is actually occurring?

Faye Wheatley, Picnic Point

Strange decision Poor Dr Barnardo, how would he feel about all this nonsense (Charity shelves mother's award for diversity, 9/2)?

 How long before it will not be recognised that women give birth and that makes them into mothers?  So many women bypass the birth through reasons unknown, but go on to help many children who have not been fortunate enough to be born into a family with a loving and caring "mother".

 Where would the children be if not for these wonderful women that we label mothers?

 How about we stop giving awards for petty things that in everyday life is normal behaviour and just award outstanding contributions to life.

Ruth Christie, Revesby

Diverse reaction Children's charity Barnardos has axed its Mother of The Year award after 25 years because it does not celebrate other caregivers like same sex parents and grandparents (Charity shelves mother's award for diversity, 9/2).

 It would seem that this diverse group has placed pressure on Barnardos to axe the Mother of the Year award with a view to making an award that recognises all care givers. As institutions continue to be besieged by progressive activism it cannot be very long before Mother's Day will come under attack for being too traditional and not inclusive.

 Every day, in every country, you will see compelling examples of unwavering, unyielding, uninterrupted commitment of mothers to their children and families. The unconditional love a mother has for a child is its own reward Peter Penglis, Kambah, ACT

Days of a fair go are gone What a country we are turning into - motherhood under question (Mum's the word, 9/2), and the woke brigade forcing Eddie McGuire out of a job after 23 years (Eddie says bye bye Pies, 10/2), with no evidence of racist behaviour for the past eight years.

 The days of a fair go are gone. When is someone going to stand up and tell these whingers to go jump or are we going to keep caving in to every complaint?

Denis Walford, Kiama

Another scalp Eddie McGuire's scalp is now nailed to the cancel culture's post with many more to be added as the woke offended find every which way to pull down the Israel Folaus and the Margaret Courts of this new age world we find ourselves living in John Partridge, Manly

Waste of paint If our politicians would enable our police force to police rather than spend time doing administrative functions and raising revenue they wouldn't be ignoring petty crime such as graffiti (Mural vandals given a spray, 10/2).

 Petty crime costs someone, but it is all too often left unattended by police. Getting away with petty crime encourages moving to more serious crime.

Bruce, Gosford

Food for thought Why are we dumping all of our fruit and vegetables because we can't bring in workers to pick it? What about using some of the people on JobSeeker - rural districts have a very high youth unemployment? Or do we just keep putting up with weak governments?

Chris Weeks, Moorebank

Briefly ...

I'm not at all concerned about Donald Trump's impeachment, but if there is a Mr Pelosi I sure feel sorry for him.

Barry Laurie, Tweed Heads

* * * The World Health Organisation has failed to discover the origins of coronavirus. Surprise, surprise.

David Davies, Newcastle

* * * The number of times I hear the word unprecedented these days is unprecedented. Sam Saidden, Parramatta

* * * Word play for Peter Waterhouse (Letters, 10/2). Just like to poynt out that Peter has spelled the word kount wen we all no it shood be cownt. Consentrait Peter.

Tony Wilkinson, Surfers Paradise, Qld

* * * Reading about how Crown has been found unfit to hold a licence, a question came to mind: is Crown just a subsidiary of some Chinese laundry business?

Richard Merrell, Penrith

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
OFFICIAL Australian analysis of the World Health Organisation (WHO) report into the origins of COVID-19 has rejected outright one of its central hypotheses that the virus might have been carried on imported frozen goods and originated outside China.

The WHO's month-long investigation into the pandemic's origins this week made several key but inconclusive findings, including the virus was active outside the Wuhan markets and could have been brought in from elsewhere "in South-East Asia". China's scientists had -earlier gone one step further, suggesting it may have been on imported seafood and beef from countries -including Australia, Brazil, India and the US.
---
World Hoax Organization PAPER TIGER THE World Health Organisation has been slammed for failing to pass on life-saving information about COVID-19 in the early stages of the disease's spread - and its "cosy" relationship with China is to blame, critics say.

With the coronavirus pandemic continuing to kill thousands across the globe, the WHO has been more concerned with issuing a directive about the "stigma" attached to the illness.

It chastised US President Donald Trump for referring to the origins of the disease as a "Chinese virus", saying: "The stigma is more dangerous than the virus itself … stigma is the most dangerous enemy". It also warned against calling people who contract the virus "victims" or to talk about people "infecting others" or "spreading" the virus because it assigns blame.

The WHO has been called on to increase its attention on China as the nation prepares to restart its economy after its corona shutdown. But China experts in Australia warn that is unlikely to happen because of the "cosy relationship" between the world health body and the communist state.

It comes as US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo repeated his charge that Beijing had delayed sharing information on COVID-19 and "truly put thousands of lives at risk".

"My concern is that this cover-up, this disinformation that the Chinese Communist Party is engaged in, is still denying the world the information it needs so that we can prevent further cases or something like this from recurring again," he said.

Taiwan's vice president Chen Chien-jen said his nation had told the WHO that human-to-human transmission was possible in December, but its failure to pass that information on until mid January meant "an opportunity to raise the alert level both in China and the wider world was lost".

Author Clive Hamilton, whose book Silent Invasion warned of Chinese influence in Australia, urged the WHO to monitor China's claims that it was virus free and able to restart its economy.

"When the virus began the WHO, instead of listening to the medical staff on the ground, accepted the line of the Chinese Communist Party," Mr Hamilton said.

"Thousands of people have died outside China because the WHO kept repeating the misleading messages of the Chinese Communist Party. The protesting voices of the citizens were the ones telling the truth." He said at the heart of the cosy relationship was the WHO's politically correct director general, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus.Mr Ghebreyesus' home country of Ethiopia receives massive bundles of Chinese cash.
---
Meet the student taking on top Oz uni for its links to the CCP WHEN he's not a "fire-breathing -activist" taking on the insidious influence of China's Communist Party in Australia, Drew Pavlou loves his two dachshunds Max and Luna, reading Shakespeare and chilling with his mates.

Becoming one of the world's best-known student activists overnight after he took on one of Australia's leading universities for its links to the Asian superpower, he said people often expected him to be serious like Greta Thunberg.

"I'm a human rights campaigner but I have never been a serious person. I love humour and satire," the 20-year-old University of Queensland student said yesterday.

He said he fully expects the uni to expel him this week but believes it would be the best news because he wants to take the 110-year-old institution on in the Queensland Supreme Court … and win.

Mr Pavlou and his top-flight barrister Tony Morris QC, who is representing him pro bono, walked out of a disciplinary hearing last week, where he faced 11 allegations of misconduct listed in a 186-page -document.

"It's the vibe. It's justice. It's Mabo, it's the vibe," Mr Pavlou said outside the hearing, channelling Dennis Denuto in the movie The Castle.

He shot to international fame last year when he was among a group -attacked by Chinese nationalists while protesting in support of Hong Kong's pro-democracy movement. Mr Pavlou's activism was condemned by the consulate-general of China in Brisbane, Dr Xu Jie, an adjunct professor to the university.

For the student of philosophy, history and English literature, it was also his satire and stunts that got him into trouble as he aimed them at Beijing. The complaints against him include posing outside vice-chancellor Peter Hoj's office wearing a Hazmat suit. Professor Hoj has been a consultant to Beijing's global Confucius Institute, of which there are hundreds around the world and 13 at Australian universities.

He also promoted a fake Confucius Institute panel discussion about "why Uighurs must be exterminated", a pointed attack on the persecution of the ethnic minority in China.

He said yesterday that he had a lot of support from students from around Australia, including those at the University of Sydney, who are also worried about the lack of human rights in China.

A Chinese human rights magazine called him "the most famous undergraduate student in the world" and he has featured in The Washington Post. Mr Pavlou said he always wanted to be an activist but expected to wait until he had graduated.

Now he has shelved plans to be an academic and may give politics a go - as an independent.

"I'm often portrayed as a troublemaker, someone who is hard, but I like having a laugh. I'm a young bloke," Mr Pavlou, the oldest of three kids in a Greek-Cypriot family, said.

"In person I'm a little bit more quiet. I'm a bit of a softy and my dogs are the loves of my life. But then I get pumped and I get into fire-breathing mode. I do like causing trouble." A member of the university senate representing 35,000 of the students, Mr Pavlou is not racist and has a lot of great Chinese friends and supporters. However, he said China's recent trade threats against Australia for calling for an independent inquiry into the origins of COVID-19 just confirm the nation is a thug and a bully.

As a literature student he loves Richard Flanagan and refugee writer Behrouz Boochani but his favourite is Shakespeare, because of the Bard's ability to force readers into empathy for characters they may otherwise dismiss, such as Shylock in the Merchant of Venice who is more complex than he first appears.

"I'm a great believer in the power of literature to transform lives and let us see the humanity in others." The fight however has taken its toll with countless death threats made through his Facebook page from mainland China and even Chinese students in Australia. They have been reported to police. "It's been really intense and I am a bit tired at the moment but I don't regret any of it whatsoever," he said.
---
It was Chinese philosopher Confucius who said before you embark on a journey of revenge, dig two graves. The Chinese Communist government would be familiar with the musings of Confucius but they certainly didn't have that little gem of wisdom in mind when they declared war on our barley and meat industries.

All because we had the temerity to ask for an inquiry into the origins of the coronavirus. If it wasn't so serious it would be comical. The bully beating up on the little kid because he can.

But guess what? That bully in the playground has a willing mate. The Victorian government and our university sector have put the almighty dollar before our national interest.

As such, we're actually not all in this together. Australia's most left-wing government, Victoria, and the university sector, a hotbed for Marxism, are cosying up to the Chinese Communist Party at a time when most Australians are aghast at Beijing's bullying tactics.

As China comes down hard on our barley and beef producers, the Victorian government continues its belt and road folly with the Chinese. This policy allows the Communist country to get a major foothold into Victoria through infrastructure projects.

Meanwhile, at the University of Queensland, they continue to go after a student who organised anti-China and pro-Hong Kong rallies.

Let's not forget that Australia's tertiary education system is heavily reliant on Chinese students.

In Victoria, we've had the unedifying comments of its treasurer Tim Pallas, saying the federal government had "vilified" China by leading the call for an independent inquiry into the origins of COVID-19. Seriously, Pallas should resign. It's that simple. If Pallas thinks we've vilified the Chinese by trying to keep them accountable he doesn't deserve to be in public office.

As for UQ student Drew Pavlou, he and his legal eagle Tony Morris walked out of a disciplinary hearing because they say UQ was not complying with its own charter by refusing to hand over documents required for Pavlou's defence - a claim UQ strongly denies.

Those documents allegedly related to the university's vice-chancellor liaising with the Chinese consulate on how they should manage the public relations response to the Pavlou matter.

That imbroglio is now headed for a likely hearing in the Supreme Court. For Victoria and the universities, the pursuit of the almighty dollar has affected their judgment. Australia has 14 Confucius Institutes and there's one in the NSW Department of Education. Nowhere is the increasing level of interdependence between China and Australia more evident than in the academic landscape. As China flexes its economic muscle, bullying Australia with its rhetoric and actions, the pandering of Victoria and the universities to Beijing is not a good look.
---
'The great lesson of Watergate," said veteran reporter Bob Woodward, who broke the scandal that toppled US President Richard Nixon, "was that if Nixon had apologised early, or even midway through the scandal and demonstrated some soul-searching introspection, he would have been forgiven." The very same can be said of Victorian Premier Daniel Andrews over his government's decision to use private security instead of police and defence force personnel in the management of Victoria's hotel quarantine plan.

The difficulty of a crisis is that it requires momentous decisions in rapid fire time frames and that, often, it's only long after the worst of it passes that the impact of decisions become known. What might seem like a small decision at the time can, later on, become one of the most critical. It's important, when we look back at the events of Friday, March 27, not to forget this.

Do I think, knowing what they know now, that coming out of the National Cabinet at 1pm, the Andrews government would have made the decision and announced it at 3.15pm in the Premier's media conference, to use private security in quarantine hotels? No, I don't.

In a crisis, mistakes will be made, and while you must do everything to mitigate them, delay is just as risky. So, it requires a weighing of both. This is where the words of Woodward are so relevant to Victoria right now.

The Premier is being pursued over the question of who made the decision to use private security guards, not so much because it was an error but because he has used every political device available to him to avoid telling the truth. As always in political crises like this, it's the cover-up that brings the leader down.

For months, Victorians werekept in the dark about the origins of the state's second-wave outbreak until the Premier was forced to admit the disease had leaked out of the failed hotel quarantine operation when genomic testing confirmed 99 per cent of new cases were linked to hotels.

With things so clearly out of control, the federal government's repeated offer of ADF troops was finally taken up in late June - 850 personnel on their way - only to be abruptly withdrawn by the Andrews government the next day lest the "optics" of the ADF coming to the rescue in Victoria showed up the Premier, Police Minister Lisa Neville and their police and emergency union mates. We will never know what might have been the outcome if the troops had arrived. It was only after he could no longer spin away the need for an investigation that the Premier established the Coate Inquiry but, by its very terms of reference and powers under the state's Inquiries Act it lacked the grunt needed to get to the truth.

Of course, the Premier wants Coate to find that somehow no one made an actual decision to jettison police and instead employ private security, because any person who had made that decision would be culpable for the deaths of 800 Victorians out of the state's second-wave outbreak.

Powerful new industrial manslaughter laws in Victoria have put the wind up ministers, political staff and bureaucrats, and led to the farce of weeks of testimony where "I don't know", "I can't recall", "it wasn't me", and "I don't remember" has replaced any semblance of accountability in the state.

The line being put to the inquiry is that no one person made a decision here and that, instead, there was a government-wide "creeping assumption" that private security would be used, rather than Victoria Police or the ADF, to guard returning travellers. I regard this as wrong, as a lie, and nothing close to the truth.

Key decisions are made, they don't just happen. The notion that no one made this decision cannot be allowed to stand because it erodes the fundamental principle we have in our democracy of responsible government. I've been on the inside of government for 16 years - in times of crisis like the Martin Place siege, the downing of MH17, and the deployment of troops to fight against Islamic State - and let me tell you, every decision is made deliberately, the head of power to make that decision is carefully confirmed and every decision is authorised.

The decision to use private security in Victoria was made between 1pm, when National Cabinet concluded on Friday, March 27, and 3.15pm when Daniel Andrews publicly announced it. No "creeping assumption" becomes established in just two and half hours, and no Premier announces anything without being sure of what he is announcing, least of all a character like Andrews.

On Friday last week, all hell broke loose as the various parties to the COVID-19 Hotel Quarantine Inquiry lodged their closing submissions. Victoria Police couldn't have been more definitive, saying that they rejected any concept of a "creeping assumption", and said that a decision was made. Indeed, they pinpoint the time it was made as being within 1.16pm and 1.22pm - the much discussed six minute window, between then Chief Commissioner of Police Graham Ashton's text at 1.16pm asking whether his police officers would end up guarding hotels and another text at 1.22pm making clear that security guards were to be used (with a follow up text confirming this was all because of a "deal set up with DPC" (Department of Premier and Cabinet) for Victoria not to use police as in other states, but instead hire private security.

This is the critical decision that, with hindsight, led to 800 Victorians losing their life, hundreds of thousands of small businesses their livelihood, and, even as you read this today, has meant five million Melbourne residents remain in their 12th week of lockdown.

I had never attended a press conference as a member of the media until I fronted the Andrews press conference on Friday because I couldn't stomach the lies and the spin anymore. Valiant reporters have been asking tough questions for months, and for that they've been vilified online and trolled just for seeking the truth.

But isn't that what a free press is for? I couldn't care less about the #Istandwithdan haters. I have a thick skin. I've done my best to read all the evidence I can. Let me tell you, the holes are glaring, that's why, despite the Premier's skilful obfuscation, he can no longer smother and spin what's gone on.

Inside the Victoria Police submission is critical evidence that during the Ashton six-minute window there is a text from the Premier's private office to a deputy secretary (Mr Tim Ada) in the Premier's department referencing the provision of "security" in relation to the set-up of the hotel quarantine plan. This is just 19 minutes after the National Cabinet meeting had concluded that police and ADF would guard these hotels across the country, yet barely 20 minutes later, Victoria is going it alone with private security. There was never a "creeping assumption" about hotel security. There was a decision. There was a clear decision made involving the Premier's own office. It was made and communicated to Graham Ashton in the six-minute window and reconfirmed - as evidence to the Coate Inquiry shows - in a 2pm meeting between the Police Chief, the Police Minister and the head of Emergency Management Victoria. Daniel Andrews himself then announced the decision at 3.15pm out front of his own office. If Daniel Andrews thinks otherwise, he can release his phone records and those of his key minister and staff, including his chief of staff who has never given any statement or evidence to this inquiry, to clear the record. He shouldn't need to be asked to do this by the inquiry. He should volunteer it in the public interest. He can do it today and he must do if we are to respect the dead by getting to the truth of what went so catastrophically wrong.
---
This means (trade) war: China cuts our meat

BEIJING officials slapped an immediate import ban on four Australian meat processors without prior warning yesterday amid escalating tensions over China's handling of the virus pandemic.

The operators, including one in northern NSW, were stunned to learn their licences to export were suspended, due to technical labelling and certification issues dating back a year.

The trade block came just weeks after a warning from the Chinese ambassador to Australia that exports including red meat, wine and education would be targeted if the Morrison government did not end its call for an -independent inquiry into the origins of COVID-19.FULL REPORT PAGE 8
---
No opinions in the opinion column today.

Any and all opinions have been banned on the strict orders of Craig Bellamy, the Melbourne Storm coach who decreed this week that opinions on players like, say, his captain Cameron Smith, are irrelevant unless you have actually played in the NRL.

So, unless you have done it yourself, you are not allowed an opinion on it. That is Bellamy's Decree.

So don't tell me who you think wins the Melbourne Cup this year unless, by Bellamy's Decree, you have ridden in the Cup yourself.

That movie you saw last week? I don't care if you thought it was boring or if you loved it so much you want to tell all your friends they must see it.

Bellamy's Decree states that unless you have actually acted in a movie, or at least written a script, your opinion really doesn't matter too much at all.

And that means here, too. None of you, under Bellamy's Decree, are allowed an opinion on this newspaper column unless you have actually opened a vein over a keyboard and put down a thousand words you hope might make a difference.

The irony is that Bellamy's Decree - don't speak about it unless you have done it yourself - seems to apply to all, it seems, except Bellamy.

Just a few days back he used his pre-game press conference to defend his captain once again with a defence that was last used in the Paul Keating administration.

The opinion, hereby known as Bellamy's Decree, was flawed and dangerous back then and it is even more so now.

"I don't know whether it spurs him on or not but it's funny, the criticism comes from some people that haven't really played the game and they haven't coached the game," Bellamy said about Smith.

"All of a sudden, they're experts. Cameron has played 400 NRL games, almost 50 State of Origins and so many games for Australia.

"But people that have never played the game, never coached the game, never really been involved in a footy club come out and bag him all the time.

"Most guys that have been in the game as players or coaches - whether they like Cameron or they don't like Cameron - I think they have a lot of respect for Cameron.

"Because of what he's done in the game.

"But most of this criticism comes from guys that have never been involved in footy clubs except for when they were in under 8s or under 12s.

They've never coached in the game, they've never played the game at NRL level. "I don't really understand it. I think there should be a lot more respect for a guy that's the only guy in our game's history to play 400 games.

"If they want to make it personal - and they probably do - that's their business." It is a dangerous philosophy that says unless you have played the game you have no right to an opinion on the game.

There are hundreds of thousands of rugby league fans who buy memberships and season tickets and spend thousands of dollars on merchandise every year who have never played the game at NRL level.

Surely they deserve the right to an opinion, right?

Millions more watch the game on the very televisions that justify the big broadcast deals, that add up to something like 80 per cent of the game's revenue, and they do so with a view on the game.

They either like something or they don't like it, that is our nature. Surely they are entitled to share it with someone?

People have opinions because they care. It is impossible that every opinion will be the same and, to be honest, it would be dull if they were.

That clubs foster this thought that nobody is allowed an opinion on them unless they have played the game reveals how insular clubs really are, and this lack of understanding must be greatly alarming for the NRL.

Some of you might have noticed, but the game has just emerged from one of the most difficult periods in its history.

A huge financial reset has taken place.

Chairman Peter V'landys rescued the broadcast deal that shaved tens of millions off NRL income. Part of those negotiations centred on the fact that there has been a worrying trend in ratings in recent years which has failed to justify the richness of the broadcast deals.

That is not an opinion, just economics.

Channel 9 chairman Hugh Marks told the game it was "boring", mostly because of the wrestling tactics that originated at the Storm and which have been allowed to evolve, unhindered, for almost a -decade.

It was a comment that received widespread support.

V'landys emerged from the negotiations determined to make the game more attractive. He introduced a six-again call to replace a penalty - aware teams were deliberately conceding penalties to buy time to restore their defensive line, artificially slowing the game down - which immediately quickened the game's pace and made it far more -attractive.

V'landys knows the game must make itself more attractive to the wider public to put the game in a position to demand more broadcast money next time around.

Instead of dismissing fan concerns because they have not played the game, V'landys is doing the opposite and listening to them. They should be the priority, not the enemy.

Sports surge and fade in -importance all the time.

Boxing is no longer the sport it once was, reduced to tier-two importance. Mixed martial arts barely existed 20 years ago but is now the fastest growing sport in the world.

Rugby union once ran neck and neck with rugby league in Australia. And sports most often fail, it is generally believed, because they fail to engage the next generation.

And it has taken the COVID-19 crisis for the NRL to concede it has allowed the game to become less attractive over so many years.

A club chairman claimed V'landys told all the clubs at Wednesday's phone hook-up that the clubs must start looking beyond their own backyard and begin looking after the interests of the game as a whole.

Clubs are adopting negative tactics to win the premiership (and remain employed for the short term) without a thought for the long-term benefit of the game.

In fact, it is to the detriment of the game's long-term ambitions, but few care because they will not be around by then.

Some clubs will argue, with legitimate claims, that it is the club's job to do what it can to win premierships and that it is the NRL's job to protect the overall integrity of the game.

So the NRL has done that.

New rules designed to break the grip wrestling had on the game and to make it faster and more dynamic were introduced.

Yet after just three weeks some clubs have examined how the referees are adjudicating and begun to work out ways around the rules.

It is a cynical, distressing indictment on what the game has become. Clubs once again testing the game's nerve.

The Storm, for example, challenged the NRL last weekend, laying all over the tackled player for the next two tackles after a six-again call, almost daring the referee to double up his call.

This extra time in the tackle allowed the Storm to then -restore the integrity of their defensive line. It was exactly the kind of cynical tactic the game has declared it will stop.

Instead of copping it sweet, though, the Storm immediately claimed they were being picked on.

It is a strategy so overused it has become boring.

Publicly they claimed innocence while, behind the scenes, senior club figures campaigned to be left alone, claiming an agenda against them because they are from Melbourne.

Apparently, this opposition to neck cranks is being driven by simple state jealousy.

The Storm forget the many number of players and assistant coaches who have left their organisation for other clubs and who take that information, what they did and how they did it, with them to those clubs.

Fans do not like wrestling and the way it has shaped the game. The NRL should be commended for acting.

Here is my question, though: If the Storm is so sensitive to criticism about their wrestling tactics, why does the club invest so much time inventing new ones? Maybe someone who has played a few games can tell me why.
---
Victorian Premier Dan Andrews has been using his state's inquiry into Victoria's disastrous coronavirus failures as a shield to avoid commentary on the issue.

Every time Andrews has faced press conference questions about his government's obvious missteps, he pretends that the inquiry prevents his ability to respond.

It doesn't. As The Daily Telegraph has pointed out, the inquiry does not have trial status. There is no jury to be influenced by anything Andrews says.

The premier was always free to comment - or, more appropriately, to apologise for his government's incompetence.

Nowhere was that incompetence more damaging than in the decision to employ private security firms instead of police to guard quarantine hotels.

Well, the time is almost up for Andrews. The inquiry began yesterday, and the opening -remarks of Tony Neal QC, the counsel assisting, went directly to the heart of the matter.

"Information already available to the inquiry suggests the possibility of a link between many of the cases of coronavirus identified in the Victorian community in the past few weeks and persons who were quarantined under the hotel quarantine program," Neal said.

Then came this follow-up: "Comments made by the chief health officer to the media have suggested that it may even be that every case of COVID-19 in Victoria in recent weeks could be sourced to the hotel quarantine program." Every. Single. Case. No wonder Andrews has been so keen to avoid any answers. Unlike the Victorian and Australian public, who have been denied access to the medical data on how the coronavirus spread from its quarantine origins, Neal and the inquiry will have all of that evidence.

What the inquiry does not have is much time. The inquiry is due to report by September 25.

Still, that may be time enough to establish the key facts in Victoria's quarantine debacle - and who was responsible.

Andrews will likely continue stonewalling. Yet all that will do is build anger as the inquiry's due date draws near.

Despite its brevity, we would ask that the inquiry also investigate how Victoria's coronavirus incompetence influenced increased infection rates in NSW. NSW has an enormous stake in this inquiry, too.
---
IS China changing its tune?

Where once Beijing belted out the punchy 1980s dance hit "When Two Tribes Go to War", now it is cooing the 1970s pop-funk anthem, "Why Can't We Be Friends".

In an extraordinary address to the National Press Club on Wednesday, China's deputy head of mission at their -embassy in Canberra, Wang Xining, made a number of bold claims that seemed to seek to recast relations.

Among them: That Beijing "respects Australia's sovereignty", that the Chinese were personally hurt by Australia's push for investigation into the origins of COVID-19, and that "cold hearts and dark minds" should not cast a "shadow" over our relationship.

He even compared the relationship to a marriage, saying: "While a rift between husband and wife hurts one family, a rift between two countries hurts millions." It's all quite something to hear from a senior Chinese diplomat, given that the official Beijing line, as amplified by state media, until recently was that Australia was nothing more than "chewing gum stuck on the sole of our shoes".

If this is a marriage, it's not a healthy one. No partnership where one side alternates -unpredictably between acting the bully and wanting to kiss and make up can be.

And in considering China's bluster, it is also worth considering the bluff. Beijing likes to act as though it holds all the cards and that its rise is inevitable - so we'd better get on board or get steamrolled.

But historic flooding in China and worries about the Three Gorges Dam have highlighted the country's infrastructure and food security issues.

And revelations about their infiltration of Australian universities suggests that the communist state knows that it cannot innovate, and therefore must steal, new technologies. Those hoping that this might be a reset, and that China may be seeking to tone things down, should watch for actions - and not just words.
---
THE World Health Organisation has called on wealthy countries to stop acting like desperate shoppers in the toilet paper aisle and buying up all the available doses of COVID-19 vaccine.

The pandemic is picking up speed, with 14 per cent more cases reported globally per day this week compared to the previous week.

As a result, much of the world has been racing to grab vaccines. The European Union has announced a deal for another 300m jabs from Pfizer/BioNTech, doubling its supply of the drug.

But there might be some doses going spare in France, which is now paying the price for not clamping down on its powerful anti-vax movement.

A poll at the end of 2020 found only 40 per cent of French people planned to get inoculated.

Even in the face of rising case numbers, a new poll on Friday showed that figure was still an appallingly low 56 per cent.

Britain, meanwhile, approved its third vaccine on Friday from US firm Moderna and is rushing to vaccinate as many as possible.

It reported a record death toll of 1325 on Friday, while London Mayor Sadiq Khan declared the capital was "at crisis point" and about to run out of hospital beds.

The news came as WHO called on rich countries to let poorer countries have some vaccines.

WHO's Covax program head Bruce Aylward said: "Fifty per cent of the high-income countries in the world are vaccinating today. Zero per cent of the low-income countries are vaccinating. That is not equitable." But there was also scandal for WHO, which is already struggling to get permission from China to let a team inside to investigate the origins of COVID-19.

Francesco Zambon, a WHO co-ordinator based in Venice, said his 102-page report into Italy's failures to contain the virus was withdrawn to avoid embarrassing Ranieri Guerra, a senior WHO official who was previously a key player in Italy's pandemic planning.

Mr Guerra, now a WHO assistant director-general, denies any wrongdoing. In positive news, fears have been rising over the new British and South African mutations of the virus but BioNTech has announced its vaccine is effective against these strains.

However, that is scant comfort for those infected in Iran.

Iran's supreme leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei banned the import of US and British-produced vaccines, saying they were "completely untrustworthy".

He tweeted: "It's not unlikely they would want to contaminate other nations". Iran has reported more than 1.2m cases. China, the source of the virus, has now sealed off two cities and imposed travel restrictions on 18m after uncovering 127 cases. And Sweden, which controversially avoided lockdowns, has passed a law giving the government stronger new powers to impose restrictions.
---
A POWERFUL British -politician has been seeking support from Australia for a co-ordinated "rethink" by western countries to their "unbalanced relationship" with China after it covered up the coronavirus pandemic.

Iain Duncan Smith (pictured), a former Conservative Party leader, has been putting in the foundations for a new approach to China after the disaster of COVID-19. The China hawk said he had been talking to Australian politicians about his campaign for a tougher line on the -Communist nation.

"There needs to be a complete rethink on our unbalanced relationship with China," he said.

And he said it was inevitable that there would be an -independent inquiry into the origins of COVID-19, which Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison has demanded."I'm sure there will be a full inquiry and there will be a full inquiry into the behaviour of the World Health Organisation in the early months, but that's a matter for the -government," he said.
---
Labor on outer with workers IT appears that ex-Labor front bencher Joel Fitzgibbon has caused a bit of a stink in the Labor Party as they try to work out what they stand for (Labor to try to dig itself out of a hole, 17/11).

Their climate wish list is certainly at odds with their traditional origins, and many of their voters now question the veracity of the party.

It might serve Labor well if they tap Anthony Albanese on the shoulder and pass the remit onto someone like Joel Fitzgibbon, who can lead them in a more beneficial direction.

Because at present, having a Greens Party and a quasi Greens Party just doesn't cut the mustard.

Peter Cattlin, Freshwater

If workers who vote Labor feel they are being ignored or forgotten by the party, all they have to do is stop paying their union fees (Labor to try to dig itself out of a hole, 17/11) - that would be certain to get their attention.

Stop an income stream at your peril.

Barry Laurie, Tweed Heads

Payback for botched payment scheme The word "fiasco" has typically followed "Robodebt", and with good reason (Victims of robodebt win $1.2b in compo, 17/11.) For many, the scheme's attempt to ensure recipients of Centrelink benefits were not over-receiving payments sounds only reasonable.  But this was never a good policy and was poorly implemented as the article implies, calling it a "botched scheme". The government's decision to walk away from defending the scheme against a class action is because they know what everyone else knows - the scheme was basically unlawful.  "Overpayments" the government recovered based on a flawed income-averaging model, were "not lawful debts", according to the Department of Social Services. The only real question is: why did the government wait so long before deciding to settle the class action.

Dr Jack Dikian, Mosman

Taxpayers slugged again There's a double whammy in the Robodebt class action settlement. The feds or - or, more correctly, taxpayers - are coughing up $1.2 billion to pay back and compensate about 400,000 Australians illegally stung with welfare debts (Victims of robodebt win $1.2b in compo, 17/11).

Yet no ministers, or their advisers, have been held to account - especially as Robodebt caused untold stress and trauma for these hapless victims and their families. Not happy, Jan.

Steve Ngeow, Chatswood

Distress signal Just to clarify, the people on welfare who received benefits they were not entitled to sued because they didn't want to give it back, and will now be paid extra as compensation for their emotional distress (Victims of robodebt win $1.2b in compo, 17/11).  Over $1.2bn to people already on taxpayer money and many in public housing. It's amazing how some always know how to lawyer-up. We reap what we sow.

Kim Baker, Engadine

Sitting on Defence I can understand the veteran's mother being concerned about the appointment of a former Defence worker to the new position of National Commissioner for Defence and Veteran Suicide (Mum questions impartiality, 17/11).

I also have reservations about the appointment. To me this appointment is little more than a backside-covering and public relations exercise designed to make it look like something is being done on veterans' suicides but also to put a buffer between the government and the problem.

It seems every time we have a serious problem these days, the solution is to appoint a commissioner, along with a shed full of hangers-on, called staff. Very costly and to what effect?

John George, Terrigal

Border force The current situation where the premiers can justify imposing lockdowns and restrictions by merely saying they are acting on the advice of their chief health officers is not good enough and the public is entitled to know "exactly" why they are being imposed (NSW still open as SA fights outbreak, 17/11). Following the new cluster in South Australia, the immediate response by some premiers was to close their borders.

They did not provide any other justification for their decisions other than they were acting on the advice of health experts. Really?

The following is an extract from the World Health Organisation regarding their position on lockdowns: "Large-scale physical distancing measures and movement restrictions, often referred to as 'lockdowns', can slow COVID-19 transmission by limiting contact between people. However, these measures can have a profound negative impact on individuals, communities and societies by bringing social and economic life to a near stop." I'm not a health expert. However, from what I have read regarding the advice on border closures and lockdowns, supported by WHO's position, these measures should only be imposed as a last resort.

Bernard Thompson, Cowra

House sitting It was reported this week that a Vaucluse mansion sold at auction for more than $24 million, reported to be $10 million over the reserve price. The buyers were reportedly two young Chinese, aged 26 and 29.

These two young people also own a $10 million apartment atop the Swiss Hotel in the CBD.

I am somewhat confused because I was under the impression that high-priced real estate was under federal government control when it came to purchases made by overseas buyers. Particularly Chinese buyers.

There is a government spat over the banning of many of Australian exports by the Chinese Communist Party. Why are overseas buyers allowed to make these sorts of purchases?

David Griffiths, Wellington

Chewy on your boot I have made a promise to myself never to buy an Allen's (Nestle) product again (Redskins ripped as Chicos are now cheeky, 17/11). Why?  Well, apart from standing on a street corner and shouting the odds it is the only way I have of protesting about this ridiculous rebranding of products simply because the name may offend about one in every million or so people.  What kind of mindset Chris O'Donnell, Nestle general manager, confectionary, has in this regard is hard to imagine. Redskins, Chicos, Coon Cheese? Australians grew up with these names. Civil libertarians have changed the world so that now kids run wild in school (School under siege, 14/11) and a prison sentence is more like a home from home thanks to the Prisoners Action Groups. I'm an ex-Pommie and I now declare the word Pom to be offensive and I want something done about it!

Alex Hosking, Gold Coast

Briefly … At the completion of the State of Origin I plan to then use the Suncorp Stadium as a venue where all families and friends of those who have been denied access to the state to attend births, terminal illness and deaths can come together knowing they are protected from the dreaded virus. We have so much to be thankful for in the knowledge that Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk and her ever-present state health adviser can consecrate this facility - walking on water is their next feat.

Herbert Montaine, Tugun, Qld

* * * Despite all of their country's flaws, Americans still have the right to freely choose their president - unlike the poor Chinese community who just have to accept decisions from Communist Party leaders or pay a price which will never end in their favour.

Brad Probert, Woodlands

* * * The Nestle company has delivered on its promise to give new "woke" names to the popular Allen's lollies Redskins and Chicos after they were deemed offensive and inappropriate (Redskins ripped as Chicos are now cheeky, 17/11). I hope all of the hard-line change merchants are happy now after getting into quite a tizzy earlier in the year.

Peter Penglis, Kambah

HAVE YOUR SAYMAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
China's president backs review into coronavirus

CHINESE President Xi Jinping last night backed a comprehensive international review of the COVID-19 pandemic in a sensational diplomatic win for Australia.

The powerful leader told the World Health Assembly his country supported the idea, but only after the pandemic is "brought under control". The Morrison Government's push for an independent inquiry into the pandemic had been gaining momentum with 116 countries signed on to co-sponsor a draft resolution put forward by the European Union that included a motion calling for the review.

In an address to the virtual session of 194 countries, Mr Xi defended China's record on sharing information with the WHO, saying his nation had "done everything in our power to support and assist countries in need." He pledged $2 billion in funds over two years to help the global COVID-19 fight and proposed continued "research into source and transmission routes of the virus ... led by WHO and conducted in (an) objective and impartial manner".

"This may not be the last time a major health emergency comes knocking at our door," he said. "China supports the idea of a comprehensive review … after it is brought under control." Mr Xi said the virus "caught the world by surprise" and "I mourn for every life lost and express condolence for the bereaved families", adding: "The disease does not respect borders." "In China, after making painstaking efforts and enormous sacrifice, we have turned the tide on the virus and protected the life and health of our people." UN secretary general Antonio Guterres opened the event, saying "a microscopic virus has brought us to our knees." "When we have finally turned the page on this pandemic … there must be a time to look back," he said.

"Now is not that time, now is the time for the international community to work in solidarity.

"Either we get through this pandemic together or we fail." After helping to secure 116 countries to co-sponsor the draft resolution calling for the independent review and examination of the origins of COVID-19, the Morrison Government has renewed its push to beef-up the powers of the World Health Organisation. Health Minister Greg Hunt was expected to speak to the World Health Assembly overnight in favour of the draft resolution proposed by the European Union and highlight the need to bolster the power of officials to investigate new diseases.

"We need to learn the lessons from this pandemic and ensure we have the strongest possible global health architecture, with an enhanced ability to prevent and respond to future outbreaks," he was expected to say.

"This could include an examination of whether the WHO's mandate and powers, including around inspection, need to be strengthened to ensure WHO members have timely access to critical data." China denied WHO officials entry into Wuhan for almost a month after the first case of COVID-19 in December. It has remained reluctant to release detailed case data, but may now do so.
---
AUSSIE wheat farmers have become the latest victims of China's vendetta against our nation, with the communist state slashing its Australian wheat imports to an almost 10-year low.

It comes as Beijing ramps up its attack on Australian farm commodities and threatens to disrupt international trade worth hundreds of millions of dollars a year.

China imported 880 tonnes of Australian wheat in November - the lowest amount since 2011 - according to customs data, as tensions between Beijing and Canberra show no signs of abating.

Australia exports about $4.6 billion worth of wheat a year globally, with China accounting for about 10 per cent of it.

Beijing's tightening on Australian wheat comes amid a blockbuster crop for Australian farmers, with production forecast to more than double this season to about 31 million tonnes, according to the Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics (ABARE).

China's communist regime has already slapped punitive tariffs or banned a range of Australian products from barley, timber and beef, to wine and seafood after Scott Morrison sought an inquiry into the origins of COVID-19. FULL REPORT IN BUSINESS P60-61
---
'Those who have caused problems should be the ones to solve problems," China's Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao -Lijian told Australian reporters last week.

Very well, then. We'll let China get on with solving the coronavirus. Or we would, if the Chinese dictatorship showed any inclination to do so. As matters stand, China's communists won't even agree to an investigation of the virus's origins.

Asking for information on the Wuhan flu only enrages them.

"China is angry. If you make China the enemy, China will be the enemy," a Chinese government official told a Nine reporter last week.

That outburst followed the deliberate leaking of a Chinese government document that listed 14 specific grievances with Australia.

They include "spearheading a crusade" over China's intrusions into Taiwan and Hong Kong, banning Huawei spyware from the 5G network, blocking Chinese investment in crucial areas of Australian infrastructure and agriculture and, of course, calling for an independent investigation into the origins of COVID-19.

Everything would be tickety-boo if Australia complied with these directives. As Nine political editor Chris Uhlmann summarised: "All can be repaired if we are willing to muzzle our media, shut down our think tanks, sell off strategic assets and shut up about the origins of COVID-19. Simple." Not too much to ask, really. Maybe we could get Kevin Rudd, that petition bloke, to act as a go-between.

"Our two countries have different political systems," Rudd once told a Chinese interviewer. "We also have slight differences in our political values." Only slight differences, mind.

On the one hand, we have voting, which is how we dumped Rudd in 2013. On the other, China has Xi Jinping, whether they want him or not.

Another slight difference is Australia not forcing ethnic minorities to work in slave labour camps. Also, we don't send bills for bullets to the families of executed dissidents, mainly because we don't execute them in the first place.

You know, maybe Rudd isn't really our go-to guy on this. He lacks nuance. Perhaps the ABC's Stan Grant could assist. On Saturday, Grant invited his readers to "imagine for a moment the view from Beijing".

Or from Ultimo. Same deal, really.

"The Chinese Communist Party has overseen an economic miracle. In three decades it has taken a country that once could not feed itself and turned it into an economic powerhouse," Grant wrote.

Capitalism, even in state-controlled form, always creates wealth. This is not a miracle.

"China's rise has been peaceful. It has joined in a global rules based order: a member of the World Trade Organisation, the World Health Organisation, a permanent five member of the UN's Security Council." He means peaceful tyranny by unaccountable international forces. "It is a signatory to global compacts like the Paris Climate Accords and engages in peacekeeping and -humanitarian operations." How's the peace going in Hong Kong lately? Also from Grant, Beijing's all-seeing interpreter: "When Australia calls for an inquiry into the origins of coronavirus without first liaising with China, why wouldn't Beijing be annoyed?" Better questions: why doesn't peaceful, humanitarian Beijing run an open inquiry, and why should Australia trust the findings of any bogus UN-associated "investigation"?
---
Wokesters: we don't care a Bean WELL done Rowan Atkinson in calling out the cancel culture and woke whingers (Cancel culture's no joke, 7/1). It reminds us that the minority seems to get everything they want, just like spoilt children chucking a tantrum until they get their way.

 They see their opinion as the only one that matters, and no discussion can be entered into. There is an old saying: "Empty vessels make the most sound." It is time for the majority to stand up and speak up, otherwise we will end up as a humourless, boring, downtrodden society too scared to say or do anything in case it might be misinterpreted or offend someone.

Joe Kovac, Prestons

WHAT many followers in the cancel culture mob rampaging through Australian, British and American history don't understand is that many of the people they would erase from history were the equivalent of today's progressive, woke and creative culture (Cancel culture's no joke, 7/1).

 It's also pertinent to note that it's not the names of those involved in the lynching that survive, it is their victims.

Bruce Collison, Banks, ACT

Christmas Island stay should be cut short For those who are sick of being in detention at Christmas Island, you only have yourselves to blame for being there (Christmas Island detainees set fires, run riot at centre, 7/1).

 If you didn't break the law you wouldn't be there, but you chose differently.  Peter Dutton and Scott Morrison can fix the problem by putting them all on the first planes out of here back to their country of origin.

 Mr Dutton needs to act swiftly to have them out of this country and have their families pay for the damages they've caused.

Narelle, Sydney

You read it here It is uncanny how the rise of the cancel culture and the notion of personal disinvestment is reflected so fore-tellingly in George Orwell's political prophecy novel, 1984 (Cancel culture's no joke, 7/1).

 The idea that people, including comedians, celebrities and other personalities are boycotted, or censored, essentially because of something they said or did within a past historical context, talks to the manner in which Orwell saw the mob-ruled culture maintaining power through "two-minute hate" periods where citizens were encouraged to publicly express their hatred for perceived enemies.

 I think the novel should be compulsory reading at schools.

Dr Jack Dikian, Mosman

Keeper laughter alive I totally agree that minorities are attempting to silence humour (Cancel culture's no joke, 7/1).

 I recall an episode of the Simpsons sending up Australia and our way of life - not one complaint, we laughed with the Yanks till our sides split.

 But making bad comments about a single person and attempting to demoralise that person at work or pleasure is a different story.

Peter Coote, Kings Park

It's a jumbo problem Well, Robert Irwin certainly created a kerfuffle by flying in a helicopter too low over a Tasmanian National Park (Crikey! That's a bit low, 7/1).  One must now wonder what furore will eventuate when hundreds of jumbo passenger planes will be skimming over our World Heritage Blue Mountains National Park during take-offs and landings.  The outcome will be deafening.

Alex Uren, Canowindra

Flight of fancy It seems the Tasmanian Wilderness is for the exclusive enjoyment of bushwalkers (Crikey! That's a bit low, 7/1).

 Bushwalker Meredith Thurstans is quoted saying: "It's just not on. You don't walk for three days and expect some peace and quiet then be buzzed by a helicopter." I hope she takes all her waste, including human, with her.

John Stuart, St Fillans

One for the road If drivers obeyed speed limits and current road rules and regulations, what is the issue whether mobile speed cameras are marked or unmarked (Letters, 7/1)? Obviously, common sense and responsibility no longer exist.

 These are also missing from other aspects of everyday life. David Crawford, Gwynneville

WHO? Why? Where?

China is blocking World Health Organisation investigators from entering the country (WHO's the boss? China blocks COVID team, 7/1). Why would this matter now? It is too late.

 The Chinese have had ample time to reshape Wuhan, remove evidence, even reprogram people. I think physically visiting Wuhan now is meaningless. It was all clear from day one that the virus was Chinese. We need to move on.

Mokhles K. Sidden, South Strathfield

Inspector hex If the Chinese government won't let WHO health inspectors visit the country, they must have something to hide (WHO's the boss? China blocks COVID team, 7/1).

 We could have found out where this COVID-19 virus originated. George Orban, Breakfast Point

Page turner Yesterday's Daily Telegraph sent me from laughing to tears in the turn of a page. Rowan Atkinson dressed in a Nazi uniform looked hilarious (Cancel Culture's no joke, 7/1), then turning the page to those two young boys killed in Wellington (Killed in 'idiot act', 7/1) was heartbreaking.

Gary McClean, Gymea

Mind over matter We have a worldwide pandemic which is causing deaths and a huge amount of infections. We are fearful of going out to shopping centres and restaurants. We are mindful of social distancing, washing our hands and wearing masks. We have people who have lost their jobs. Some businesses have gone bust. The travel industry is in tatters. The words "hotspots" and "clusters" have taken on new meaning. Our national debt is out of the ballpark. We've lived through arguably one of the worst years in history.

 Now we find that Lara Worthington is happy with her body (Mum's the word in body battle, 7/1).

How good is that?

Marg Swindells, Castle Hill

Just for openers What about Will Pucovski our new opening batsman for Australia?  For his young age he has shown in the 3rd Test that he has great concentration, determination and patience. Will, I can see you becoming one of our great batsmen.

 It is great to see one so young showing immense knowledge in his batting style.  Go Will, we will be watching you for years to come.

Barry, Hallidays Point

Briefly … ABC journalists and political commentators remind me very much of Donald Trump. Neither can acknowledge that a new government has been elected and has a clear mandate from the people.

John Partridge, Manly

* * * Just wondering if the government will use the new laws being legislated - trolling, bullying or offending anyone online - against the cancel culture clique. Give us back the right to choose what we watch.

Pat Murphy, Ermington

* * * Last year, crippling droughts and bushfires. This year, floods. I believe we're going to be $300bn in the hole because of COVID. Can't we cough up $10bn to build John Bradfield's dam system? He was a very clever bloke. Just do it!

Bill, Gosford

* * * As an avid reader of The Daily Telegraph for 50 years, I read the headline story then go to the Letters as it's good to read other's points of view, and Warren's cartoon puts a smile on my face. Next I read the obituary column and if my name is not there, I make a cup of tea and have a good day.

Ron, Granville

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
There's no edge going the sledge WHAT a riveting Test match. It's a pity the final day was marred by the appalling behaviour of Tim Paine in his exchange with Indian batsman Ravi Ashwin (Growling pains, 12/1). This on top of the behaviour of Steve Smith in remarking the batsman's mark in an attempt to throw him off his game.

Looks like the Australian cricket team are back to their old ways. This is how other countries perceive us as a nation through, among other things, the actions of our sporting teams. We are all judged by their actions. They should be reminded of that. It's time we showed some class.

John Lyden, Zetland

Just when it seemed that when Tim Paine replaced Steve Smith as captain after Sandpapergate he set about restoring our reputation and removing the 'ugly Australian' tag, his disgraceful behaviour in the Third Test has destroyed those efforts and returned to the idea that if you can't get the batsman out by legitimate means resort to sledging and abuse. How disappointing. I hope India stick it to them now.

Ted Ellis, Botany

So we now have a sledger as Australian cricket captain. Tim Paine went over accepted banter to Ravi Ashwin as India fought hard to draw the Sydney Test. Paine's dropped catches should be his main concern.

Geoff Hinds, Merrylands

McGowan bordering on a power trip Western Australian Premier Mark McGowan delivered a low blow to NSW for its handling of the COVID crisis in stating elimination was better than achieving no community transmission (WA joins in sick border brawl, 12/1).

The bigger issue now is that some Premiers are on an unprecedented power trip. They think they are experts in everything and anything.

It's a wonder Premier McGowan hasn't taken the Mexican wall approach and started building his own. State border closures have impacted families, trade and tourism. If the federal Government wasn't so accommodating in giving money to keep the economy going things would be completely different. After this is all over it will be interesting when Premiers get together to discuss things. You will be able to sense the tension and cut the air with a knife. It will take a long time to heal relations.

Joe Kovac, Prestons

Weak constitution Premier Mark McGowan (WA joins in sick border brawl, 12/1) and the other socialist state Premiers by their own actions demonstrate their total disregard to Section 92 of the Australian constitution.

But to criticise NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian, who has been the only one to act correctly throughout this whole episode is disgraceful. I'm also very disappointed with Prime Minister Morrison in not defending our Australian constitution.

Barry Stenner, Tweed Heads

Sad state of affairs I'm tired of having my constitutional freedom to travel restricted solely because I live in Sydney. Please withdraw NSW from receiving any overseas returnees; let the other States, especially Western Australia, be the quarantine cleaners for COVID-19.

WA citizens need to get a taste of what we have had to endure the past 12 months, particularly considering their bragging that they can do it better. Fair go, mate.

Peter G. White, West Ryde

Fly by nighter Mark McGowan, it's easy to say that NSW can't handle the COVID-19 problem. Well, as from today Western Australia can take all return travellers from overseas.

As it stands NSW is taking most of them. And yes, Annastacia Palaszczuk, Queensland should take your fair share, too.

Leo Christensen, Cranebrook

Switched on Origin Energy's plans for a $1 billion battery (Mega battery projects to spark green power, 12/1) doesn't mention that batteries store energy, but do not create it, and fails to say where the energy will come from.

Perhaps they are wise to site the battery in a coal field, so on windless nights they can burn some coal to charge the batteries. If they do, I recommend a High Efficiency, Low Emissions coal plant that can generate continuous power for 50 years, rather than the four hours claimed for their battery.

This would be funny if we were not all facing higher power costs from this crazy idea.

Doug Hurst, Chapman, ACT

Get to the point All you anti-vaxxer clowns hiding behind social media should adhere to Louise Roberts (Anti-vax going viral, 12/1). We are still fighting COVID and all they can do is squawk their diatribe against vaccination.

Erwin Vitnell, Bathurst

Testing times While I applaud the NSW Premier and her team for the job they are doing in dealing with the COVID situation, I can't help but be frustrated with what are seemingly contradictory statements being made regarding testing (Race to solve mystery source, 12/1).

On the one hand we are told that there is no attempt to eradicate the virus because that is not possible. Instead, we are told that the aim is for zero community transmission which makes sense. On the other hand, every day someone says the testing numbers need to be higher.

Now if, as stated, the aim is to eradicate community transmission then presumably people won't have symptoms because they haven't caught the virus. If they don't have symptoms or haven't been in close contact with someone who has tested positive then presumably they don't need testing so the numbers are what they are.

So is the case that what the government wants is as many people as possible to get tested regardless of whether they have symptoms or not or do they only want those with symptoms or who have been in close contact with someone who has tested positive to get tested? If the former, then they should say so, instead of every day stating the requirement for testing is "even if you have the mildest of symptoms". I find it very confusing.

Brent Hedges, Manly

Profits all atwitter All sides of politics should be opposing the censorship of the US President (MPs not so tweet on censoring Trump, 12/1).

Twitter allowed Trump's 88.7 million followers to directly communicate with him, including those wishing to be critical. In practice, Twitter's relationship with Trump was one of interdependence.  Bypassing the "fake" media was otherwise impossible. Millions of followers are great advertising revenue. Rusticating their (orange) goose laying golden eggs will be costly. Yesterday, Twitter reported a first quarter $8.4 million loss compared to last year's $191 million profit. With $3.43 billion debt, Twitter itself may be following Trump out the door. Epitaph writers might ponder the cost.

Alan Sexton, North Parramatta

Briefly ...

When WHO inspectors finally get into Wuhan to trace the origin of COVID-19 all they'll find will be traces of fresh paint.

Tom, Drummoyne

* * * Banning Donald Trump from any social media platform means nothing - he will start his own. It will be short on punctuation, grammar and probably the truth, but that will make it interesting. I look forward to signing on.

Herbert Montaine, Tugun, Qld

* * * The new Lamb Council advert is brilliant but I have no doubt President Palaszczuk will make a complaint to the Advertising Standards Board.

John Stuart, St Fillans

* * * Australian skipper Tim Paine's decision to bat first in Melbourne and his poor keeping has badly affected Australia's chances of winning the series against India. The three dropped catches on day five in Sydney were not very difficult and let India off the hook. A good leader but now in his twilight.

John Donohoe, Epping

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
DIPLOMACY ON THE MENU

A SENIOR Chinese diplomat has claimed COVID-19 may not have originated in Wuhan, accused Australia of "whining" about Beijing's influence and denied it is using "bullying" trade tactics.

In a rare public appearance, deputy head of mission at the Chinese Embassy Minister Wang Xining acknowledged the coronavirus was first "identified" and "reported" in Wuhan, but that did not mean it was the source.

"I think it is up to the -scientists to find out the origin, and also how it has been dealt with by different governments," he said.

Mr Wang described Australia's proposal for an independent inquiry into the coronavirus pandemic as "shocking" and claimed it "hurts the feelings" of Chinese people.

The top Chinese diplomat was served up a meal of Australian beef and barley with a side of red wine ahead of his speech at the National Press Club in Canberra Wednesday - a not so subtle reference to the three sectors Beijing has targeted in its escalating trade war. But he dismissed suggestions Australia was being "targeted" with trade sanctions due to its pursuit of a COVID-19 -inquiry, saying the recent launch  of an investigation into wine was not  a -"coercive move" by the Chin-ese government.

Mr Wang also defended China's controversial programs, including Confucius -Institutes and the Belt and Road Initiative, warning Australia would not "enjoy today's economic affluence, cultural diversity and intellectual richness" without "accepting some foreign influence".

"I think people are smart enough to decide what influence is good and worth considering and what is bad and must be fended off," he said.

"It won't affect Australians' own choice of your political and social structure, I don't see any reason for whining about your constitutional -fragility and your intellectual vulnerability." Mr Wang also said China "respects the traditional relationship" between Australia and the US, acknowledging their shared history during the war.

"To have an alliance is not a problem," he said. But he indicated there was a problem if Australia turned on a "a third party with the strength of that alliance" with the US.

In his speech Mr Wang said Australia and China may "disagree on some issues" but the partnership will not be "wrecked" as long as goodwill was presented.

Mr Wang conceded it was "no easy task" to keep a partnership in "good shape". "It takes concerted determination and joint effort to make it thrive," he said. "A married couple knows this.

"While a rift between husband and wife hurts one family, a rift between two countries hurts millions." Liberal MP Dave Sharma told The Daily Telegraph it was "inconsistent" of China to "carry on about their own feelings" while accusing Australia of "whining".

He said if getting to the bottom of what caused the death of more than 800,000 people worldwide generated some "hurt feelings" then "that is the least of our concerns".

Mr Sharma said China was not doing itself any favours by trying to spread "alternative theories" about the source of COVID-19. "I think it discredits China, a country that has aspirations to global leadership," he said.

Mr Sharma said Australian ministers had been "very upfront" about their desire to speak with Chinese counterparts labelling Mr Wang's claims the lack of communication was only due to protocol was "disingenuous".

"I welcome his calls for a constructive, forward looking relationship, but obviously to have that you end to be prepared to talk to one another." Acting chief medical officer Paul Kelly said the Australian government was "very interested" in the -origins of COVID-19 to ensure lessons can be learned for -future pandemics.

"We know that the first cases reported … came from Wuhan," he said. University of Sydney foreign relations expert James Curran said the overall tone of Mr Wang's speech indicated a "significant" shift away from the aggressive language deployed by Chinese officials in recent months. "We may well be seeing the beginning of a thaw to the deep freeze into which Beijing has put (our) relationship," he said.
---
Questions for a nation in denial Sharri Markson (China's sneaky move, column 16/5) is quite right in her assertions about China's role in this absolutely awful pandemic that is reeking disaster on the world.

The question is why won't China let the WHO and other world health bodies investigate the source of this pandemic which after all started there?

Why did China allow International flights (not domestic) to leave Wuhan when they knew how deadly this virus was?

Why does the Chinese government continue to deny responsibility for the pandemic?

Having destroyed the economies of the world, having the virus kill 300,000 people worldwide, you would think they would be contrite not show this arrogance along with this attitude to get even with any country that might question their actions.

What makes it worse is that some within the ABC and Nine newspapers appear to have become apologists for China.

John Kelly, Koolewong

Australia must unite and stand up to trade bully Thank you James Morrow for your excellent and timely response to China's miserable and dishonest handling of the COVID-19 pandemic (Buy together or die together, column 16/5).

I was shocked to read that only 68 per cent of Australians "feel less favourable to China's system of government".

I would have expected it would be much closer to 100 per cent, given the enormity of the devastation caused by this global pandemic.

Unfortunately, there are apparently politicians and party followers of the CCP ideologies that perhaps accounts for the shortfall - democracy does come at a price.

Australians must unite and defend our hard fought for values and say "up yours" to China's tariff threats and standover tactics to deflect their undeniable accountability.

Graeme Hodder, Callala Bay

Support for new outfits Regarding the trade boycott threats from China, fellow Aussies look through your household and what do you see is the origin of most of the products "made in China".

I have a suggestion - you must have sufficient clobber in your household to last for some time. Just boycott the People's Republic of China by not purchasing any of the products made there.

There are many other countries manufacturing clothes etc such as Bangladesh or India and numerous others that would no doubt be glad to break into our markets. Give them a fair go and see how the communists like that.

Robert Lee, Worrowing Heights

Oops, Labor slips up The Labor Party has been supporting anti-bullying in the workplace for years, however its leadership now appears to be supporting China who is the bully in the playground (Labor's great wall, 15/5).

Australia must take a stance and stand up for our country as the bullying will only get worse.

China has used stealth and has quietly infiltrated this country until one day, oops, we are no longer in charge.

JA Jones, Tea Gardens

When 'loony left' is right Forget COVID-19 … this is serious. For the very first time in my 74 years on Planet Earth, I find myself in complete agreement with the utterances of well-known left-wingers including Bill Shorten, Deb O'Neill, The Australian Workers' Union and, disturbingly, Penny Wong (Labor's great wall, 15/5).

Their call for Australia to "hold its nerve" against China's call to threaten our county with trade sanctions if we pursue our call for an international inquiry into the Chinese government's role in COVID-19, is to be applauded.

It does cause one to reconsider one's perception when some in what I consider the loony left are making a kind of sense.

Alan, Umina Beach

Under cloudless skies Kudos to Adella Beaini for her story and Justin Lloyd for his picture of twins Katie and Amy Glasgow in Saturday's Telegraph (Twins who always book their rides, 16/5).

Wide-open spaces, horses, cloudless sapphire blue skies and two fresh-faced girls who love their uncluttered lives.

What could possibly make us love Australia any more than we do? Lee Du Bray, Sydney

Jaws of a dilemma A young man climbs scaffolding to gain entry into the Australian Museum in the early hours of the morning (Hunt for bonehead in brazen night at the museum, 16/5). While in there he takes selfies, one with his head in the jaws of a T-Rex skeleton.

Fossicking around ancient artefacts and old bones and samples might seem an extreme way to pass the time in this pandemic time but he was acting alone so he can't be nabbed on the social-distancing issue. But, he was dressed in double denim, that should be a crime in itself.

I wonder if he will resist the urge to post his pictures on Facebook and if his friends will dob him in. If so the police will pay him a visit and he'll be history. Funny that.

Marg Swindells, Castle Hill

Grate expectations "Prepare for the worst, expect the best, take what comes with a smile" is a great adage for Australians to reflect on.

I am not sure that coronavirus would apply to this adage but the Australian government has certainly done its best, after preparing for the worst with the help of Aussies taking what comes with a "smile".

I hope the smile lasts when we see the end results of JobKeeper and Jobseeker. Janice Russell, Malua Bay

Origin to come at end Now that the NRL has created a precedent to hold the State of Origin at the end of the 2020 season due to the COVID-19, I suggest that all future Origin competitions be held at the end of the normal club competition.

The club competition should have priority over State of Origin. NRL fans want their teams to concentrate on winning the competition, with no breaks for the State of Origin.

John Guider, Bateau Bay

Briefly …

The Communist Party of China should heed their own advice in quoting President Abraham Lincoln (Lincoln a tool for the latest PRC fools, 16/5). "You cannot fool all the people all the time." The Chinese people may finally wake up to their regimen … as the people of Hong Kong have done.

Erich, Glen Alpine "" " Notice the reports on how clear the atmosphere is in the Northern Hemisphere. Yet their coal-fired power stations have been chugging away. Seems the pollution problem is more about 1.2 billion motor vehicles and 25,000 commercial planes than the demon coal.

Doug, Port Macquarie "" " Wanting to go soft on China is why Anthony Albanese has again shown he is not up to running the country (Labor's great wall, 15/5).

G Hutton, Saratoga "" " The stance taken by some Labor parliamentarians on China proves without courage, wisdom bears no fruit (Labor's great wall, 15/5).

Simon A Pijaca, Glenhaven "" " When the world is back to normal and world travel is permitted, I believe Australia should send our PM and his family on a two-week holiday due to his fantastic efforts in steering us through these troubled times. Hawaii would be nice. Maybe also send (at NSW's expense) Shane Fitzsimmons and his family for his bushfire efforts.

Denis, Eagle Vale "" " Can't believe the number of people resisting the COVIDSafe app. A chance to save a life - maybe even their own. I have found that resisters are generally those known as narks.

Cookie, Sawtell

HAVE YOUR SAYMAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
CHINA may have fudged its COVID-19 death figures by tens of thousands, according to figures which tracked crematory operations in Wuhan this year.

A study published on the preprint server medRxiv claims the official Chinese statistics on COVID-19 cases and the country's mortality rate were wildly out, with 36,000 deaths recorded by March instead of the official 2524 - with half a million people infected with the virus. The study looked at investigative media reports of crematory operations in Wuhan - the origin and -epicentre of the coronavirus pandemic.
---
CHINA has bizarrely enlisted Abraham Lincoln, the US president best known for freeing the slaves, as its newest foot soldier in its campaign to deflect responsibility for allowing COVID-19 to infect millions of people and send the world's economy into a tailspin.

In a rambling manifesto posted on the website of the Chinese consulate in Auckland entitled "Reality Check of US Allegations Against China on COVID-19", the document accuses "US politicians and media outlet of fabricating preposterous allegations and lies" - and then goes on to attribute a quote to Lincoln (pictured): "You can fool all the people some of the time, and some of the people all the time, but you cannot fool all the people all the time." Among the claims made in the document is that it is improper to name diseases after their origin - ignoring the fact many including Ross River Fever, Lyme disease and ebola were named after where they were discovered.

The document also claims that Wuhan may not have been the source of the virus at all, and that the Chinese government did everything it could to stop its spread. Never mind the fact that China is stonewalling an investigation into the origin of the virus, threatening Australian farmers over the issue and is further thought to have destroyed samples and suppressed news to make it more difficult to find out what really happened.

Other claims are similarly fantastical, including that whistleblower Dr Li Wenliang was not arrested for attempting to warn of the coming pandemic, but was simply "taken to a police station ... and urged … to stop spreading unconfirmed information".Oh, one more thing. According to QuoteInvestigator.com, Lincoln "probably did not employ this well-known adage". Another fact China failed to get right.
---
Mouthpiece blames Australia

CHINA has warned the "writing is on the wall" for its relationship with Australia after blocking World Health -Organisation investigators from entering the country.

Tensions between Beijing and Canberra have been simmering since April when the federal government pushed for an independent inquiry into the -origins of the COVID-19 pandemic.

In an op-ed published by its mouthpiece The Global Times, Beijing warned "the writing is on the wall" for bilateral relations heading into 2021.

"In Australia's strategic cognition, China has suddenly turned from a partner to a 'threat' to its sovereign security," it wrote.

"The assumption that China is a rival is emerging, and confronting China has become a new political correctness in Australia." It comes after Beijing refused to allow World Health Organisation (WHO) inspectors into Wuhan, the original epicentre of the pandemic, as they had not been granted visas.

The move was widely criticised as an attempt to stymie the WHO's probe. Foreign Minister Marise Payne has demanded investigators be given access to the site "without delay".

"The WHO-convened scientific study is an important part of this work, and we look forward to the findings from the international field mission to China," she said on Wednesday.

"We hope that the necessary permissions for the WHO team's travel to China can be issued without delay.

"During this global pandemic that has affected all countries, international co-operation and partnerships will maximise our ability to respond and to equip us for the next pandemic." WHO director-general Tedros -Adhanom Ghebreyesus said he was "very disappointed" by the development. He called on China to expedite access to Wuhan, describing the mission as a "priority" for WHO.

Australia's calls for the inquiry sparked a furious response from China. Various Australian products, including barley, wine, wheat, lobster and timber, have been hit with Chinese trade sanctions since May. The Global Times said the deterioration was solely attributable to Australia's internal politics.
---
Plea for good police to cop our respect Society has watched around the world protests that "Black Lives Matter". Yes they do, as do all lives matter.

The right to protest and express views in a free society is respected and should never be removed.

An aspect of exercising the right to protest, is protection of life and property while citizens lawfully demonstrate. This is the sworn duty of law enforcement officers in every country in the world.

The actions of those Minneapolis officers who were the catalyst for these protests can never be condoned nor excused and shall be dealt with in accordance with the law.

I am confident the vast majority of law enforcement officers around the world do not condone the unlawful and excessive actions of the minority.

When participating in protests and publicly expressing views spare a thought for those officers who by virtue of their office have been charged with protecting your lives and your property.

As a NSW police officer during the Vietnam War protests, the Springbok tours etc, I like many of my colleagues were simply doing our sworn duty, yet all the time silently supporting the right to protest and agreeing with the opinions of those protesting. I am sure nothing has changed - the right to protest is respected and police around the world agree "Black Lives Matter".

As a protester, respect police, they in the main respect you and your rights - they are undertaking their sworn duties to protect you and your property.

Together society can fix this if we all work together.

Garry J Dunne, Gymea

Second wave fears after health protection ignored I hope there is no second wave of COVID-19 traceable to the Black Lives Matter demonstrations on the weekend (Demo ban goes viral, 7/6). If so, there will be hell to pay.

No one denies that being able to protest is a democratic right despite that large-scale protests sometimes spawn demagogues capable of fomenting dangerous behaviour, looting and the like.

Indigenous incarceration rates, deaths in custody, police harassment and other such issues which are suppurating sores on our national psyche form the backdrop to the explosion of rage here following George Floyd's killing in the US.

However, we are in pandemic times - forms of protest respecting social distance provisions that are so crucial to preventing further deaths from this killer plague would surely have been more advisable.

Ron Sinclair, Bathurst

Wedding miss; protest bliss Well we were supposed to be married this past weekend, however coronavirus put a stop to that.

We had to cancel the restaurant we had hired including the chefs and wait staff. Outfits and flowers were put on hold. No celebrant nor hire vehicles.

Friends from near and far were put on hold and accommodation centres suffered. There is an abundance of economic-impacting factors from this decision to social distance us all.

But, all this could have gone ahead if I had just said it was a public demonstration.

Chris Walsh, Lindfield

Listen up or lose out Dire consequences will prevail for governments not acknowledging the concerns of their citizenry regarding blatant racism and police brutality.

Worldwide millions of people are peacefully protesting the social ills in their respective countries and for national leaders and their administrations to blissfully ignore this will only ensure their political demise.

Eric Palm, Gympie, Qld

A demo that could go viral Being from a non-white background I was all for the Black Lives Matter demonstration - but I didn't go because every life matters when there is a high chance of spreading the virus among demonstrators.

I really hope the demonstration doesn't go viral.

Sam Saidden, Parramatta

Communist claptrap So the Chinese Communist Party is advising the people of China not to visit Australia due to increases in racism (Trade minister rejects China racism claim, Online 6/6)?

A couple of things they should reflect on - Australia is a multicultural country with the majority of the population not caring if you are black, white or brindle.

Secondly, with the CCP's cover- up of the coronavirus, I dare say their foreign visitors and income will be severely slashed not only by reduced Australian tourist numbers but fewer visits from the international community.

Hopefully the Chinese community will wake up and realise the Chinese people are being used by a regime that is in it for themselves and not the wellbeing of the population.

Brad P, Woodlands

Nasty lies unconvincing Now, the Chinese government has warned its citizens not to travel to Australia as it has become unsafe for them do so (Trade minister rejects China racism claim, Online 6/6).

What a load of nonsense! Their citizens know we are a beautiful country, with kind peaceful people who wish no harm to others.

I am sure the Chinese people know this, and understand that their government is telling them a bunch of lies.

Graeme Walsh, Fairfield.

Slow food is all the rage Food shopping is taking me a bit longer these days (Wake up and ditch Chinese imports, 5/6).

Having a browse on the internet to see which companies are wholly owned by Australia before venturing out to the shops. Then looking at labels for countries of origin and reading the percentage of Australian ingredients used.

If we are to support Australian farmers and growers we all should be on board with this.

It might take a while to check and we may even pay a bit extra but you will know you have done your best to keep money here and support our own manufacturers and growers who have been doing it tough.

You might even prefer the taste and quality of the homegrown variety as opposed to the imports.

Marg Swindells, Castle Hill

Briefly … Australia has a new transportation option - the bandwagon. It has unlimited seating capacity for self- righteous celebrities and rent-a-crowd protesters. Best of all, it runs on the cheapest form of renewable energy known - symbolism.

Scott, Manly "" " There will always be people who are racist but maybe we could occasionally acknowledge that there are a lot of us out there who are not and treat people for who they are and not by the colour of their skin.

Jackie, Miranda "" " If a court can approve a 20,000 crowd to attend Sydney's Black Lives Matter rally, then it should be OK for the government to approve a crowd of up to 15,000 to attend football matches.

Terry Groves, Forster "" " There may be hundreds of protests all over the world highlighting "black lives matter" but until we (the people) change it's a waste of time and energy. Maybe start with listening, change of attitude, education and understanding.

Helen, Condobolin "" " Thanks Gladys, I presume the 20,000 activists allowed to demonstrate in Sydney CBD on Saturday now brings to an end our Wuhan virus health rules. We, who have abided by these rules for the sake of all are not amused.

Peter Cattlin, Freshwater "" " Could ARL boss Peter V'landys run some leadership training sessions for our state premiers? He has displayed a natural ability for it, while our premiers vary between "drunk with power", and scared to adopt a position! A few sessions with an expert might help.

Bruce Cramond, NSW

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
---
THE US has slammed the Chinese- government for trying to hack its research into a coronavirus- vaccine.

US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo yesterday called on Beijing to "cease this malicious activity". "The United States condemns attempts- by cyber actors and non-traditional collectors- affiliated- with the People's Republic- of China to steal US intellectual property and data related to COVID-19 research," Mr Pompeo (pictured) said.

The FBI and Department of Homeland Security had earlier warned of the cyber espionage attempts on US scientists.

"The potential theft of this information jeopardises the delivery of secure, effective, and efficient treatment options," the FBI said.

Mr Pompeo said China's "behaviour in cyberspace is an extension of its counter-productive- actions throughout the COVID-19 pandemic".

"While the US and our allies- and partners are co-ordinating a collective, transparent response to save lives, the PRC continues to silence scientists, journalists and citizens, and to spread disinformation, which has exacerbated the dangers of this health crisis," Mr Pompeo said.

The cyber warning comes after China has been accused of covering up the origin of the coronavirus and delaying warning the world it was contagious so they could stockpile medical supplies. Australia and the US are among the nations calling for an independent investigation- into how COVID-19 spread from Wuhan to the world, infecting more than 4.3 million and killing 300,000 people.

Beijing yesterday denied responsibility for the cyber attacks. "China expresses strong dissatisfaction and firm opposition to such smearing," foreign ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian said. "Judging from past records, the US has carried out the largest cybertheft operations worldwide." The coronavirus has plunged relations between Washington and China to new lows, with US President Donald- Trump hinting this week at withdrawing from a recent trade deal.

"We got a lot of things going with China. We're not happy about China - I will tell you that," Mr Trump said yesterday at the White House."The ink wasn't dry on a great trade deal and, all of a sudden, the plague comes in from China. We're not happy about it."
---
UN, China cop blame CHINA failed to contain the coronavirus "more forcefully" a year ago and the United -Nations-run World Health Organisation was too slow to declare a global emergency, -independent investigators say.

A panel of experts has -released a scathing interim -report on the response to the COVID-19 pandemic, criticising the WHO for taking until January 30 last year to declare the situation an "emergency".

The panel was formed last year after Australia and other countries called for an independent process to review the global response to the pandemic, and is led by former New Zealand prime minister Helen Clark and former Liberian president Ellen Johnson Sirleaf.

The report argued the "evidence of deficiencies in pandemic preparedness and response" called for "far-reaching change for the -future".

It confirmed "evidence from Wuhan" dating back to late December 2019 suggested that "a novel virus may be -responsible for the clinically observed cases of pneumonia of unknown origin".

However, Chinese authorities did not alert the world to this possibility at the time.

"A close reading of the chronology of the earliest events in the emergence of COVID-19 also suggests to the panel that there were lost -opportunities to apply basic public health measures (early)," the report said.

"What is clear to the panel is that public health measures could have been applied more forcefully by local and national health authorities in China in January." The panel also questioned why the WHO did not refer to the coronavirus as a "pandemic" until 11 March, and called for a major overhaul of the organisation's global alert system.

"Critical elements of the system are slow, cumbersome and indecisive," the report said.

The panel has recommended a system of "real-time" data gathering fed by local clinics and laboratories be created within "days, not weeks".

"This technical updating must be accompanied by a political step-change in the willingness of countries to hold themselves accountable for taking all necessary actions as soon as an alert is issued." The panel said the WHO had been "underpowered".

"The incentives for co-operation are too weak to ensure the effective engagement of (countries) with the inter-national system in a disciplined, transparent, account-able and timely manner," the report said.

Australia's Chief Medical Officer Professor Paul Kelly said he understood why there would be criticism of China's early actions in the pandemic, but their successful containment of the virus in Wuhan showed there was "a lot we can learn from the Chinese -response". "They had a terrible situation there, which they have been able to come through," he said.
---
THERE HASN'T BEEN A SPORTING YEAR LIKE IT. ANGUS MORRISON GETS OFF THE COUCH AND TRIES TO MAKE SENSE OF THE 12 MONTHS THAT HAVE PASSED HIM BY

JANUARY ■ New Year's Day and the first international sporting title of 2020 goes to Scotsman Peter Wright (he of the multi-coloured mohawk) at the PDC world darts championships in London. That is, if you think darts is a sport. Personally, I think if you can be obese and do it while drinking a pint, it's not a sport.

■ The first tennis grand slam gets under way in Melbourne, with defending champion Novak Djokovic and American Sofia Kenin taking the titles. Not much to cheer about for Aussie fans, but Dylan Alcott did win the wheelchair quad singles. At least the tennis gives everyone something to think about instead of those awful bushfires - good on Nick Kyrgios for leading the appeal for bushfire assistance. The year can only get better from here.

■ The Netball Nations Cup is played in England and won by New Zealand. Australia didn't take part, which suggests the name of the tournament needs a bit of work.

■ Super Rugby starts with the Brumbies edging the Reds 27-24 after being 10 behind at the break. Looking forward to this comp - it should be a beauty this year.

■ PANDEMIC UPDATE: Rumours of a dodgy-looking virus coming out of China. Probably just man-flu.

FEBRUARY ■ In the annual clash of helmets and shoulder pads, the Kansas City Chiefs win the Super Bowl with a 31-20 victory over the San Francisco 49ers in Miami. Chiefs quarterback Patrick Mahomes (below) is MVP. Ridiculously good, that bloke. It was the turn of Demi Lovato to murder the national anthem and J-Lo and Shakira provided the halftime entertainment that wasn't actually terrible.

■ Deontay Wilder and Tyson Fury go toe-to-toe again after that dodgy draw in their first fight. Wilder is a slight favourite but the Gypsy King is all over him, knocking him down twice before the American's corner throws in the towel in the seventh. Fury had earlier blamed a failed drug test on eating the meat of an uncastrated boar. What a load of balls.

■ The Six Nations kicks off in great style, with France beating England to wipe that smug grin off Eddie Jones's face.

■ In Super Rugby, the Tahs run in five tries to beat Johannesburg's Lions 29-17. I tell you, this is going to be a rugby season to remember.

■ PANDEMIC UPDATE: Definitely not visiting some place called Wuhan anytime soon. And if I do end up there, I'm not eating the bat soup. Rest of the world seems OK.

MARCH ■ The month when COVID-19 went from being a pain in the throat to a pain in the backside. Everything is being cancelled. Golf's Players Championship? Cancelled. The Australian Grand Prix? Cancelled. The world figure skating championships? Actually, that one was a good call.

■ The Brits are a bit slow on the uptake, though. Ban large gatherings, the scientists wailed. Yeah, all right, they said - but we've got just enough time to cram hundreds of thousands of punters into the four-day Cheltenham racing festival, and 54,000 into Anfield to watch Liverpool play Atletico Madrid in the Champions League. What's the worst that could happen, you ask? Now the country is plague central.

■ Verry Elleegant (above) wins the Tancred at Rosehill. Honestly, can't anyone spell these days?

■ The NRL season kicks off. The Warriors score zero points against the Knights. Could be a long season for the Kiwis. There's only time for two rounds. Bloody COVID.

■ The AFL season kicks off. For one weekend. And the Cats lose. Then it gets cancelled as well.

■ The Brumbies smash the Waratahs 47-14, and all the rugby gets cancelled. What's the point of life?

■ PANDEMIC UPDATE: Thanks for nothing, China. My hands are now consuming more alcohol than my mouth.

APRIL ■ Nothing of any note happens in the world of sport. The only international sport we can watch or bet on is Belarusian football because the country's president Alexander Lukashenko is a bona fide nut-job who thinks COVID can be cured by vodka. Turns out COVID is about the only thing that can't be cured by vodka. Everyone's favourite team Slutsk start the season well, but they were pretty quick to go down (behave).

■ PANDEMIC UPDATE: The neighbours seem to be building an extension purely out of toilet rolls.

MAY ■ Belarusian football is getting a bit boring. Luckily, the NRL starts up again. The Dragons are beaten 18-0 by the Warriors. Any team who can't score a point against the Kiwis should take up darts or some other non-sport. Synchronised swimming. The triple jump. Dressage. The Storm are beaten 22-6 by the Raiders. Looks like no title for the Victorians this year.

■ PANDEMIC UPDATE: The kids are being home-schooled. I've suspended both of them for squabbling. Amazon boss Jeff Bezos is now the richest man in the world and sent a personal letter of thanks to my wife.

JUNE ■ The first leg of American racing's Triple Crown, the Belmont Stakes, is won by Tiz The Law - the first New York-bred winner of the Belmont for 118 years. Which is also the single-most boring sporting statistic of 2020.

■ The Euros were supposed to start, but England will have to wait another year to not win a major football trophy.

■ At least the Premier League is back, with Liverpool simply having to turn up for the next six weeks to win the title. And there are no English football fans at the games. Bonus.

■ In the NRL, the Broncos are smashed 59-0 at Suncorp by the Roosters, who didn't even have James Tedesco in their line-up. Scary stuff from the Chooks. And the Storm lose 21-14 to Penrith. No chance for the title, those southern blokes.

■ The AFL starts up again, with a 36-36 draw between the Magpies and Richmond. Didn't they practise their kicking during the season break? Gary Ablett Sr could score 36 points by himself. In a quarter.

■ PANDEMIC UPDATE: I don't even know what month it is. Wish I had shares in Netflix and whoever makes Guinness.

JULY ■ Formula One is back! And Lewis Hamilton didn't win! The season opener in Austria goes to Valtteri Bottas, with Mercedes teammate Hamilton finishing fourth. Normal service soon resumes, with the Brit winning virtually everything for the rest of the season. He'll be knighted in January - it's a racing certainty.

■ Liverpool wins the Premier League title by a lot. Bournemouth, Watford and Norwich City are relegated, replaced by Leeds, West Brom and Fulham.

■ In the NRL, the Broncos are smashed 48-0 by Wests Tigers. I'm so old, I can remember when Brisbane could play footy. Lockyer, Langer, Lazarus, Thorn, Tallis … those blokes must be spinning.

■ The Olympics are starting in Tokyo! No, wait, they're not. They're off 'til next year. Or maybe the year after. Or maybe never, if we're all dead. And Wimbledon is off. No huge loss, that one. It's been rubbish since McEnroe retired.

■ PANDEMIC UPDATE: My teachers said I wouldn't amount to anything, but here I am, lying on the sofa, saving lives.

AUGUST ■ Lewis Hamilton wins the British Grand Prix. And the Spanish Grand Prix. And the Belgian Grand Prix. Just give him the bloody trophy.

■ Bayern Munich win the Champions League final against perennial chokers PSG, courtesy of a goal from former Paris player Kingsley Coman.

■ We even had a golfing major as the sporting world unsteadily got back on its feet, with Collin Morikawa, one year out of college, taking home the PGA Championship title. Not bad for a guy who can't even spell Colin.

■ Speaking of which, Verry Elleegant wins the Winx Stakes. That sure is some troubled spelling.

■ In the NRL, the Eels (left) beat the Storm 14-0. The Melbourne team must be 100/1 to take the title.

■ PANDEMIC UPDATE: Oh, thank god. They're starting to play some proper sports around the world. And American football.

SEPTEMBER ■ Frenchman Pierre Gasly wins the Italian Grand Prix from 10th on the grid to have one Finnish punter dancing in his lounge. The unnamed gambler put 24 cents (no Kerry Packer, this bloke) on a podium finish comprising Gasly first, Carlos Sainz second and Lance Stroll third. What, no Hamilton? No Bottas? No Verstappen? Are you mad? Apparently not, because that's how they crossed the line - at odds of 167,000/1.

It was the equivalent of predicting the next Rugby League World Cup will finish Lebanon 1, Portugal 2, Russia 3.

■ At somewhat shorter odds, Bryson DeChambeau - channelling his inner Thor - beat up the notoriously tough Winged Foot golf course in New York to win the US Open by six strokes. He was the only player to finish under par.

■ The Storm lose again - 30-22 to the Dragons - to surely end any hopes they have of winning the NRL title.

■ PANDEMIC UPDATE: Doctors are still telling us not to touch our faces, but that's virtually impossible if you have a can of beer in each hand.

OCTOBER ■ Richmond wins another AFL title with an 81-50 victory over Geelong in the grand final - at the Gabba of all places. And at night. The result probably shouldn't count for those two reasons. The Cats led by 22 points late in the second quarter, but could add only 15 points in the final two quarters as the Dustin Martin-inspired Tigers stormed to a third title in four seasons. Martin won the Norm Smith Medal in all three wins.

■ Speaking of handy players, LeBron James (right) leads the LA Lakers to the NBA title with a 4-2 finals win over the Miami Heat.

■ Revenge is sweet for Jose Mourinho as his new club, Spurs, spank the club who sacked him, Manchester United, 6-1. At Old Trafford. He was extremely humble afterwards, as we've come to expect.

■ If horses were played by Hollywood stars, Classique Legend would be George Clooney - the handsome grey devil. What a win in the The Everest at Randwick. And down south, Verry Elleegant wins the Turnbull Stakes. This horse is starting to p*** me off.

■ The Six Nations is finally completed and Eddie Jones is grinning smugly again. England wins the title, with the Irish players looking like they spent the off-season in the pub with free pies. Italy comes last. They've more wooden spoons than Jamie Oliver.

■ And the Melbourne Storm win the NRL Grand Final. Wait. What? ■ PANDEMIC UPDATE: For something made in China, this coronavirus sure is lasting a long time. Is it 2023 yet?

NOVEMBER ■ "Hey, Tiger! How on Earth did you shoot a 10 on a par-three?" "Because I missed the putt for a nine." For 15 minutes, Masters champion Tiger Woods played like the rest of us. In the final round at Augusta, he arrived at the par-three, 155-yard 12th hole in good shape - if a bit far back to trouble the leaders. His tee shot lands short of the green and spins back into Rae's Creek. Playing from the drop area, his third shot reaches the green but also spins back into the water. Think Kevin Costner in Tin Cup, but without Rene Russo to ogle.

Back at the drop area, he overcompensates and his fifth shot lands in the back bunker. From there, he chips across the green and back into the water. His balls spent more time in the water than David Hasselhoff's. Dustin Johnson wins the green jacket.

Aussie Cameron Smith is runner-up, becoming the first golfer in Masters history to shoot all four rounds in the 60s - 67, 68, 69, 69. I backed him at $90, but not each-way. There's a name for mugs like me. It's "mug".

■ The team tagged "the worst Queensland side in 40 years" upsets the highly rated Blues, winning the Origin series 2-1. Who else but Wayne Bennett to the rescue once more for the Maroons?

■ In cricket, the Mumbai Indians beat Delhi Capitals by five wickets in Dubai to win their fifth IPL title - as anyone with half a brain (rugby television match officials, for example) could have forecast at the start of the tournament when they saw Trent Boult and Jasprit Bumrah in the same bloody team.

■ Twilight Payment holds off the fast-finishing Tiger Moth to win the big one at Flemington. The horse I thought couldn't lose lost. And then got shot.

■ A week after the Wallabies were humiliated 43-5 by the All Blacks in Sydney, Dave Rennie's men (above) stun them 24-22 in Brisbane. New Zealand then get beaten by Argentina for the first time in, like, forever. Glorious stuff. This new coach of theirs, Ian Foster, should get a pay rise and a contract extension. He's bloody rubbish.

■ Lewis Hamilton (below) bags his seventh world Formula 1 title - equalling Michael Schumacher's record - with victory in the Turkish Grand Prix. A win in Bahrain - where Frenchman Romain Grosjean survived his car breaking into two pieces and exploding - means Hamilton won 11 of- the season's opening 15 races.

■ PANDEMIC UPDATE: Can't wait until my future grandchildren ask me what the pandemic of 2020 was like. "No idea, kids. I was drunk for most of it."

DECEMBER ■ The Premier League table is starting to take shape. Except it looks upside down. Spurs are top, West Ham fifth, and Southampton sixth. Pre-season favourites Manchester City are 11th, and Arsenal have slumped to 15th after their best (only good) player Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang started playing like his mum.

■ The Formula One drivers have finally found a way to beat Lewis Hamilton (below) - give him coronavirus.

Young Scottish driver George Russell was offered Hamilton's car for the Sakhir Grand Prix in Bahrain and it turned into a day he will never forget.

Russell smashed it in qualifying to start second on the grid, quickly took the lead in the race itself and look destined for a historic win. And then things went a bit pear-shaped.

While the cars were under a flag, Mercedes called Russell in to the pits for fresh tyres. Soon back on his way to a stunning victory, the call comes over the radio: "You have to come back in - we gave you the wrong tyres." Ouch.

A quick change and Russell emerges in fifth place, but the way he was driving, he could have easily passed four cars in 14 laps. Then he got a flat tyre. He finished ninth.

While all this was happening, Racing Point's Sergio Perez was winning his first F1 race in 190 attempts - no other winner in history has taken that many races to pop his cherry.

■ England beats the French reserves in injury time at Twickenham to win the inaugural Autumn Cup, proving once again that ugly rugby will more often than not beat attractive rugby.

■ The touring Indian cricket team - Kohli et al - is all out for 36 in their second innings in Adelaide in the first Test, handing Australia an eight-wicket win. You couldn't make this stuff up.

■ The IOC goes full woke and announces breakdancing will be a sport at the 2024 Paris Olympics. Which, in its own way, sums up 2020.

■ PANDEMIC UPDATE: If you read the rules a certain way, you're not allowed to have the holidays with the in-laws. That's my interpretation and I'm sticking with it.

MARCH NRL SEASON KICKS OFF OCTOBER RICHMOND WINS GRAND FINAL
---
DIPLOMACY ON THE MENU

A SENIOR Chinese diplomat has claimed COVID-19 may not have originated in Wuhan, accused Australia of "whining" about Beijing's influence and denied it is using "bullying" trade tactics.

In a rare public appearance, deputy head of mission at the Chinese Embassy Minister Wang Xining acknowledged the coronavirus was first "identified" and "reported" in Wuhan, but that did not mean it was the source.

"I think it is up to the -scientists to find out the origin, and also how it has been dealt with by different governments," he said.

Mr Wang described Australia's proposal for an independent inquiry into the coronavirus pandemic as "shocking" and claimed it "hurts the feelings" of Chinese people.

The top Chinese diplomat was served up a meal of Australian beef and barley with a side of red wine ahead of his speech at the National Press Club in Canberra Wednesday - a not so subtle reference to the three sectors Beijing has targeted in its escalating trade war. But he dismissed suggestions Australia was being "targeted" with trade sanctions due to its pursuit of a COVID-19 -inquiry, saying the recent launch  of an investigation into wine was not  a -"coercive move" by the Chin-ese Government.

Mr Wang also defended China's controversial programs, including Confucius -Institutes and the Belt and Road Initiative, warning Australia would not "enjoy today's economic affluence, cultural diversity and intellectual richness" without "accepting some foreign influence".

"I think people are smart enough to decide what influence is good and worth considering and what is bad and must be fended off," he said.

"It won't affect Australians' own choice of your political and social structure, I don't see any reason for whining about your constitutional -fragility and your intellectual vulnerability." Mr Wang also said China "respects the traditional relationship" between Australia and the US, acknowledging their share history during the war.

"To have an alliance is not a problem," he said. But he indicated there was a problem if Australia turned on a "a third party with the strength of that alliance" with the US.

In his speech Mr Wang said Australia and China may "disagree on some issues" but the partnership will not be "wrecked" as long as goodwill was presented.

Mr Wang conceded it was "no easy task" to keep a partnership in "good shape". "It takes concerted determination and joint effort to make it thrive," he said. "A married couple knows this," he said.

"While a rift between husband and wife hurts one family, a rift between two countries hurts millions." Liberal MP Dave Sharma told The Daily Telegraph it was "inconsistent" of China to "carry on about their own feelings" while accusing Australia of "whining".

"I don't consider us standing up for Australian interests as whining," he said. Mr Sharma said China was not doing itself any favours by trying to spread "alternative theories" about the source of COVID-19.

"I think it discredits China, a country that has aspirations to global leadership," he said.

Mr Sharma said Australian ministers had been "very upfront" about their desire to speak with Chinese counterparts labelling Mr Wang's claims the lack of communication was only due to protocol was "disingenuous".

"I welcome his calls for a constructive, forward looking relationship, but obviously to have that you end to be prepared to talk to one another." Acting Chief Medical Officer Professor Paul Kelly said the Australian government was "very interested" in the -origins of COVID-19 to ensure lessons can be learned for -future pandemics.

"We know that the first cases reported … came from Wuhan," he said. University of Sydney foreign relations expert Professor James Curran told The Daily Telegraph the overall tone of Mr Wang's speech indicated a "significant" shift away from the aggressive language deployed by Chinese officials in recent months. "We may well be seeing the beginning of a thaw to the deep freeze into which Beijing has put (our) relationship," he said.
---
WUHAN THE Lantern Festival is the first significant feast after Chinese New Year and traditionally filled with light and laughter.

And there was plenty of lights and laughter going on in Wuhan, the origin city for the world's devastating COVID-19 pandemic.

But, while most of the rest of the world can only hold virtual festivals, with no community transmission since May 2020, Wuhan was able to hold a wonderful Lantern Festival. Residents packed into the Expo Gardens to appreciate the wonderful Chinese lanterns and enjoy traditional yuanxiao (rice balls stuffed with different fillings).
---
CHINA may have fudged its COVID-19 death figures by tens of thousands, according to figures which tracked crematory operations in Wuhan earlier this year.

A study published on the preprint server medRxiv claims the official Chinese statistics on COVID-19 cases and the country's mortality may not be accurate.

The study looked at investigative media reports of crematory operations in Wuhan - the origin and -epicentre of the coronavirus pandemic.

"The estimates of cumulative deaths, based on both -funeral urns distribution and continuous full capacity operation of cremation services up to March 23 give results around 36,000 - more than 10 times of the official death toll of 2524," states the report.  "Our study indicates a significant under-reporting in Chinese official data on the COVID-19 epidemic in Wuhan.

"The magnitude of discrepancy between our estimates based on cremation related data and Chinese -official figures in early February - the critical time for -response to the COVID-19 pandemic - suggests the need to re-evaluate official statistics from China and -consider all available and reasonable data sources for a better understanding of the COVID-19 pandemic." It comes as an antibody study by the Chinese Centre for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) suggested nearly half a million residents in Wuhan may have been -infected with COVID-19 - 10 times the official number.