NRL DRAWS UP SCHEDULE WORK on the 2021 NRL draw is well advanced.

Fox Sports and Channel 9 have chosen their preferred games and clubs have submitted their specific requests.

Venue availability has been factored in and all that is left now is for the NRL computer program to start crunching the data and spit out draft draws until the optimum outcome is achieved. All going well, the draw could be out by the end of November.

You can expect the season will open with the Roosters v Rabbitohs, which will be even spicier considering Nick Politis looks like pinching teenage sensation Joseph Suaalii from Redfern.

SLEEP TO BEAT ORIGIN FATIGUE AFTER the toughest of NRL seasons, Blues coach Freddy Fittler will be ramming home the importance of sleep to his players during the Origin series.

"I find the players have more clarity, more focus, their reaction times are better and they make better decisions on the field if they are well rested," he said. "It's important players get as much sleep as possible." Fittler has taken professional advice from the medical experts at ResMed and is now an ambassador for the company.

(new item with tearout)

STAYING ISOLATED NRL referees are the forgotten victims of the COVID-19 restrictions in place for most of the season.

Just like the players, the refs have had to comply with strict protocols limiting their contact with the outside world since the competition resumed in May. A small group will continue to be segregated after the grand final in preparation for the Origin series before getting only a short break then starting all over again in preparation for the 2021 season.

BELLYACHE'S GRAND FINAL HISTORY CRAIG Bellamy knows all about the pressure from grand final day. This is from the Big League program way back in 1990 when, as a halfback, Bellyache skippered the Canberra Raiders in the reserve-grade grand final against a Broncos team that included the great centre Steve "Pearl" Renouf.

THE MASK MERCHANDISE MADNESS CLUB-branded face masks have been the hottest merchandise item of the NRL finals and there will be scores of Panthers and Storm masks in the crowd tonight.

Our great mate, league legend Peter Wynn, said his sports store had sold face masks "in their thousands" during the finals, with massive demand for all Panthers merchandise.

"Penrith jerseys, grand final T-shirts, caps and scarfs have all been flying out the door but the demand for masks has been something else because it's part of the look this year," Wynn said. "It's all about showing your teams colours while staying COVID-safe." Fans are being strongly encouraged to take a mask to the grand final and wear it getting to and from the stadium, and when moving around inside the venue.