JUSTICE LEAGUE: THE SNYDER CUT * * * * 1/2 Director Zack Snyder Starring Henry Cavill, Ben Affleck, Gal Gadot Rating MA15+ Running time 242 mins Verdict Justice is finally served

Joss Whedon's 2017 version of Justice League was hated by fans and panned by critics but the restoration of director Zack Snyder's original vision makes up for all that.

For those who are new to the story, Snyder was the original director who walked away after the tragic suicide of his daughter Autumn. Studio Warner Bros asked Avengers director Whedon to come in and reshoot what was an essentially finished movie but his attempts to make Snyder's version funnier annoyed DC fans and the film took less than half of what the Avengers movies were bringing in.

The widespread shutdown of the film industry due to COVID-19 provided the perfect opportunity for Snyder to polish his version and release it as a four-hour film.

This film is both familiar and completely new. CGI villain Steppenwolf is still trying to find three boxes of power so he can destroy the Earth and rule it in the name of his evil lord Darkseid.

Batman is still trying to put together a team of Wonder Woman, The Flash, Aquaman and Cyborg to stop him.

But the way it is done is totally different. The Flash and Cyborg go from minor players to really driving the story now.

The action sequences, especially the Amazonian battle against Steppenwolf, are far better. The return of Superman is handled perfectly and the strange "Knightmare" sequence, in which Batman envisages a future where Superman turns evil, now makes sense.

Yes, four hours is obviously too much without a break but Snyder has broken it into six chapters, which form natural pause points during the streaming experience.

The film also serves as an origin story for The Flash and Cyborg, and ties more directly into Jason Momoa's Aquaman movie.

The only problem is it sets up multiple sequels in the epilogue. The thought of not seeing a Justice League 2 and 3 where all of these play out is the only disappointment.

To mangle the old saying, Justice is a dish best served cold. ON BINGE AND FOXTEL