COVID-19 has also been a tough battle for the NRLW but one of its best has always fought to play, writes NICK WALSHAW KEZIE Apps has no idea if the NRL will let her play this year. But still, she trains anyway.

Always has.

Apps is no stranger to being told she cannot play rugby league. The first time, she was 11.

Back then, a little Bega Rooster who wanted no more than to carry on with teammates like Melbourne backrower Dale Finucane.

But Apps could really play.

Still, the game said no.

Which is why some time this year, the 2020 NRLW -season must go ahead. Not because athletes like Apps are shouting for it.

That isn't their way.

Just recently, NSW playmaker Maddie Studdon offered to go around for nothing if it meant keeping the year alive. But again, the girls have played for nothing long enough.

If the NRL wants to continue growing women's footy in step with, say, Cricket Australia - who recently had 80,000 fans attend a T20 World Cup final - the competition has to be staged.

It doesn't matter where those NRL millions have gone.

Athletes like Apps, Isabelle Kelly and Jess Sergis shouldn't be made to pay for it.

Remember too, how strongly the NRL defended that Origin kiss in its contentious Simply The Best commercial?

Well, now the rubber meets the road.

Importantly, NRL chief executive Todd Greenberg met recently with a group of Jillaroos to reiterate his organisation's focus on a "whole of game" return.

But still, no guarantees.

Regardless, Apps rises each morning on a dairy farm just outside Bega and, with her own employment also on hold, lifts weights, runs, sprints and practises footwork drills.

Regarded among the best athletes in the game, the Jillaroos backrower also conducts regular Zoom sessions with Chrisy Jaffrey, an exercise physiologist at the BaiMed Performance Centre.

Located just outside Wollongong, BaiMed boasts an impressive list of clients including Apps, Matildas striker Caitlin Foord, UFC champion Alex Volkanovski and, until recently, US basketball prodigy LaMelo Ball.

Asked this week how it felt to be training without knowing what was ahead, the St George Illawarra forward said: "Our issue, it's just sport.

"And we realise, right now, there are people out there going through far worse. "But for the women's competition not to go ahead this year, given everything we've achieved, it would be heartbreaking.

"In 2019, our Origin game was the most watched female sport on TV with over a million viewers.

"It would be such a shame to have to start over." Apps, who only took up the game again aged 23, also remains convinced a time will come when the NRLW will be the domain of only professionals.

"And that's when the skill level will increase dramatically," she said. "Who knows when that happens. But it will.

"We realise there's still a lot of work to be done, and that we need to build our fan base, but what the NRL has helped us achieve so far, it's been brilliant." Which is why if the men play this year, so must Apps.She has already missed out too often.