THE World Health Organisation has called on wealthy countries to stop acting like desperate shoppers in the toilet paper aisle and buying up all the available doses of COVID-19 vaccine.

The pandemic is picking up speed, with 14 per cent more cases reported globally per day this week compared to the previous week.

As a result, much of the world has been racing to grab vaccines. The European Union has announced a deal for another 300m jabs from Pfizer/BioNTech, doubling its supply of the drug.

But there might be some doses going spare in France, which is now paying the price for not clamping down on its powerful anti-vax movement.

A poll at the end of 2020 found only 40 per cent of French people planned to get inoculated.

Even in the face of rising case numbers, a new poll on Friday showed that figure was still an appallingly low 56 per cent.

Britain, meanwhile, approved its third vaccine on Friday from US firm Moderna and is rushing to vaccinate as many as possible.

It reported a record death toll of 1325 on Friday, while London Mayor Sadiq Khan declared the capital was "at crisis point" and about to run out of hospital beds.

The news came as WHO called on rich countries to let poorer countries have some vaccines.

WHO's Covax program head Bruce Aylward said: "Fifty per cent of the high-income countries in the world are vaccinating today. Zero per cent of the low-income countries are vaccinating. That is not equitable." But there was also scandal for WHO, which is already struggling to get permission from China to let a team inside to investigate the origins of COVID-19.

Francesco Zambon, a WHO co-ordinator based in Venice, said his 102-page report into Italy's failures to contain the virus was withdrawn to avoid embarrassing Ranieri Guerra, a senior WHO official who was previously a key player in Italy's pandemic planning.

Mr Guerra, now a WHO assistant director-general, denies any wrongdoing. In positive news, fears have been rising over the new British and South African mutations of the virus but BioNTech has announced its vaccine is effective against these strains.

However, that is scant comfort for those infected in Iran.

Iran's supreme leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei banned the import of US and British-produced vaccines, saying they were "completely untrustworthy".

He tweeted: "It's not unlikely they would want to contaminate other nations". Iran has reported more than 1.2m cases. China, the source of the virus, has now sealed off two cities and imposed travel restrictions on 18m after uncovering 127 cases. And Sweden, which controversially avoided lockdowns, has passed a law giving the government stronger new powers to impose restrictions.