A pandemic is out of control and wrecking lives and the economy because of a totalitarian regime's lies

The Chinese regime has through its ineptitude, dishonesty and recklessness unleashed a virus that will leave tens of thousands dead and likely cause a global recession.

China not only lied, destroyed evidence and allowed the virus to spread but it arrested whistleblower doctors who back in -December tried to warn the world about what was happening in Wuhan. At least one of the doctors arrested and accused of -"fabricating, disseminating and spreading rumours" has since died, reportedly from the disease.  Other domestic critics of China's response to the virus have 'vanished', including tycoon Ren Zhiqiang.

What worse is that the World Health Organisation opted to -uncritically believe the lies of Chinese authorities instead of properly investigating the outbreak.

As late as mid-January the WHO were disseminating dangerous Chinese propaganda posting: "Preliminary investigations conducted by the Chinese authorities have found no clear evidence of human-to-human transmission of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) identified in Wuhan, China." The WHO's complicity in this -catastrophe is extensive; at every turn they have praised China's response, pushed its preferred narratives while ignoring the regime's gross malfeasance. The initial Chinese cover-up included ordering the destruction of lab samples that established back in December the cause of unexplained viral infections in the Hubei province. How many lives would've been saved if China had listened to medical pro-fessionals instead of silencing them with threats?

A study by the University of Southampton suggests China could have prevented 95 per cent of coronavirus infections if it implemented tough measures three weeks earlier.

But the Chinese communist regime only took decisive action to contain the virus some four weeks after arresting doctors and other whistleblowers.

Meanwhile, the WHO refused to declare a pandemic until last week and as late as February it parroted China in criticising travel restrictions. When Donald Trump and Scott Morrison implemented travel bans against China in late January they did so against WHO advice.

Indeed WHO chief, Tedros Adha-nom Ghebreyesus, claimed that such travel bans would "unnecessarily -interfere with international travel and trade" and could "have the effect of -increasing fear and stigma, with little public health benefit". With a straight face he praised China's "transparency" while claiming the virus' spread was "minimal and slow".

We now know just how dead wrong he was with world renowned immunologists, including Dr Anthony Fauci, saying that the decision to close borders was crucial in slowing the spread of the disease.

How many other countries would've closed their borders and -restricted the outbreak if the WHO had encouraged bans instead of condemning them? How many would be spared loss and suffering if the WHO did its job instead of lecturing the world about not referring to the -Chinese origins of the disease?

If we want to stop the next pandemic it's important to hold China's feet to the fire and ensure they take meaningful measures to mitigate the risks of another global crisis. COVID-19 or Wuhan coronavirus is not the first pandemic to originate from a Chinese wet market. SARS and the Bird Flu also originated from wet markets where livestock, sea life and wild animals are kept and slaughtered in horrific conditions. The cruelty of wet markets, that sees exotic animals like pangolins and civets along with cats, dogs and wolf pups kept and killed in filthy conditions, is well -documented. But the markets and the wider wildlife meat trade are also incredibly dangerous in spreading -disease.

After the SARS epidemic of 2002 to 2004 China pledged to crackdown on illegal wildlife markets.

However, it wasn't long before -enforcement was relaxed; the country's Wildlife Protection Laws are considered a joke with massive loopholes and inconsistencies.

China's propaganda campaign hasn't been restricted to lying to the WHO and playing identity politics. The regime has systematically set about controlling the narrative and pushing back against any notion that it mishandled the crisis and is responsible for the unfolding mayhem across the globe.

At home China sent hundreds of propagandists, employed by the Chinese Communist Party's Central Propaganda Department, to Wuhan to "strengthen public opinion guidance". But the regime's efforts overseas are just as nefarious.

China spends billions on its foreign propaganda efforts. The disinformation warfare poses a threat to democracies and is crucial in advancing China's interests around the world.

The current message being pushed is that China's response to coronavirus was impeccable while the US is -responsible for the virus's spread.  China's deputy director of the Foreign Ministry Information Department, Lijian Zhao, even pushed the conspiracy theory that the Wuhan coronavirus actually originated in the US. That is why President Trump continues to refer to the virus's real origins despite the hysterical reaction from the media.

We expect paid Chinese propagandists to push the regime's narratives but what has been staggering is the -inordinate number of journalists in the West volunteering to be China's useful idiots, praising the country's -response and condemning any references to COVID-19's origins.

Much of the US media, who up until recently were referring to the Chinese or Wuhan coronavirus, now claim that Trump's use of the terms is racist.They are happy to carry water for a brutal regime that imprisons and -executes dissidents, locks up religious minorities and this week expelled American journalists if it damages Trump.