NO side epitomises how gruelling the COVID--affected season has been more than the Sydney Roosters.

Coach Trent Robinson had nine first-choice NRL players sitting in the stand at WIN Stadium but the back-to-back premiers still found a way to beat St George Illawarra 24-16 in Wollongong.

With the likes of Victor Radley, Sam Verrills, Brett Morris, Josh Morris, Kyle Flanagan, Boyd Cordner, Angus Crichton, Daniel Tupou and Jared Waerea-Hargreaves all unavailable, Robinson was left with a bench that had only 34 games of NRL experience.

While the Roosters were missing the physical manpower, mentally Robinson was still able to field a team of 17 players who know how to win.

MILESTONE MAN The ever-reliable Mitch Aubusson ran out on to WIN Stadium to join an illustrious group of players who have played 300 NRL games.

So it was only fitting that the one-club veteran bagged a four-pointer. Trent Robinson said that last night's showing was a "club victory" for an ultimate clubman like Aubusson (pictured above).

"That's what you call those nights, it's a club night," Robinson said. "You see the strength of your club. It was a great night to do it on a very special occasion. They don't come around often.

"Mitchell Aubusson doesn't come around often.

"If it was ever the ultimate club night and the ultimate clubman, it was tonight for Aubbo."

BUBBLE BURST The NRL's COVID-19 bubble finally burst on Thursday in spectacular fashion. Dragons forward Paul Vaughan had to sit out the clash after it was revealed he breached the game's strict biosecurity protocols. Vaughan visited an Illawarra cafe for breakfast on game day, a decision Dragons coach Paul McGregor described as "selfish".

The Dragons sorely missed their key man and the go-forward he provides in the middle.

"It's very disappointing," McGregor said. "Once I got told what he'd done and that it was going to the integrity unit … we are well aware of our responsibilities.

"So there is no reason for it -really than it was selfish behaviour. It's not what you need from one of your senior players."

FULLBACK DUEL The Dragons' pre-season started with a duel between Zac Lomax and Matt Dufty, and coach Paul McGregor favoured Lomax in the No.1 jumper to start the year.

But that only lasted one match before Dufty was reinstated at fullback and Lomax shifted into centre. The move has produced 20 tries this season and Lomax's form has thrust him into the State of Origin conversation.

"The strength and surge about him close to the line, his defence is so strong… there are parts of his game when you see Origin moments in him," Phil Gould said.

Much to the delight of the 40 per cent of SuperCoaches who still own Lomax, the rising back scored two tries last night.

Lomax's effort in the kick chase and defence was just as impressive. "That was a try-saver there from Zac Lomax … are you watching Bradley?" Gould asked NSW Blues coach Brad Fittler in commentary.

ROOSTERS 24 DRAGONS 16 ROOSTERS Tries: J Manu 2, M Aubusson, S Tupouniua, L Keary Goals: Taukeiaho 2 DRAGONS Tries: Z Lomax 2, M Dufty Goals: Z Lomax 2