RESTRICTIONS in parts of the northern beaches are -expected to be eased today after the number of new COVID-19 infections dropped, but a new mystery cluster in the western suburbs has authorities on edge.

Health officials remain poised to enforce a full lockdown should numbers spike with Premier Glady Berijklian warning the government will take drastic action should the situation worsen.

"We are at a stage in the pandemic where we do need to be on high alert, we want to make sure we've captured all those strains of transmission," she said yesterday.

"Dealing with this pandemic is an evolving situation and every day things can change, every day the government will consider new settings if we need to, every day the government will make -decisions and move swiftly if we feel we need to." Just three new cases were recorded from 32,000 tests yesterday - two men from the same household and a male close contact - but they are a concern to officials as they are not linked to the Avalon -cluster.

Ms Berejiklian urged residents of Greystanes, Berala, Auburn and Lidcombe to be tested as health officials continue to investigate the origin of the mystery cases.

There was some much needed good news for those on the northern beaches with the Premier saying she will announce the easing of some restrictions today.

"Tomorrow we will be -adjusting the settings ... -especially the southern side of the northern beaches will feel some relief tomorrow," she said yesterday.

Further south, a Wollongong restaurant has become the focus of an urgent NSW Health investigation after it was revealed one of two local positive cases had dined there on the same day as someone from the Croydon cluster.

The Swallowed Anchor on Crown St has been temporarily closed and anyone who visited at any time of the day on Saturday December 19 must get tested immediately.

Neither of the two cases who visited the Swallowed -Anchor were infected when they visited the premises.

Genomic sequencing has confirmed both Wollongong and Croydon clusters are linked to the Avalon cluster and NSW Health is investigating whether someone exposed to the outbreak in Sydney's north has visited the restaurant while infectious. Residents on the Far South Coast are also on alert after two Victorians tested positive after crossing the border and visiting the Great Southern Hotel in Eden on December 30 and Bermi's Beachside Cafe on New Year's Eve. The couple, who were on a holiday road trip, got tested in NSW after learning a Thai restaurant where they had dined in the Melbourne suburb of Black Rock had become the centre of a new cluster. They have since returned to Victoria.