NSW Origin legend Benny Elias has labelled the Queensland government "nuts" for turning its back on State of Origin, saying: "We'll take all three games with open arms." The 2020 Origin series appears up for tender, with Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk sensationally CONTINUED PAGE 64 FROM BACK PAGE ruling Brisbane out as host during the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. Palaszczuk has also suggested the interstate series be scrapped entirely this year, or played sometime over summer, saying she is "really concerned" about the health risk to Queensland players.

So with the Banana Benders now out, Blues greats Elias and Steve Roach have urged Sydney to take control of all three games, suggesting Bankwest Stadium would be the "perfect" venue if fans are locked out.

"For the Queenslanders to say they don't want Origin, they're kidding themselves," Elias said.

"Honestly, they're nuts. I understand that, right now, health is everything. It goes without saying. But even with the NRL relaunch date of May 28, it's still a long way off.

"Especially right now, when every day is an eternity. But if Queensland doesn't want Origin, who cares? They've been screaming and carrying on recently about how much they want the NRL grand final, offering up massive amounts of money to try and take it away from Sydney. Yet now they're giving up the event of the year?

"Saying they don't want to be involved with a series that brings in record TV ratings and boasts global appeal? Queensland continues to humour me." Roach agreed, adding: "Doesn't this premier want to win another election up there?

An Origin game in Brisbane, it's like Christmas Day to them. So to just give that away … what else can we say but 'thank you, thank you, thank you'." Speaking to Channel 9 yesterday, Palaszczuk not only cast doubt on Origin being played in Brisbane during the health pandemic but questioned how the event could be held anywhere.

"I love the footy as much as everyone else," said the premier, who is also against sending Queensland's three NRL clubs to Sydney to restart the competition. "I think it's devastating we're not going to see State of Origin this year. We always have a State of Origin, but how can you have it? Maybe in December? Let's keep our fingers crossed." Apart from turning her back on Origin, Palaszczuk said she was also against Queensland's three NRL clubs moving to Sydney in order to restart the season by May 28.

"I'm really concerned about my Queensland players going down to Sydney," she said."All you need is one community transmission down in Sydney and the whole team could possibly have it."