REFORM AGENDA THE threat of a trade war with China has not stopped Australia capitalising on its success in gaining support for a coronavirus inquiry by now lobbying world leaders to give health -officials inspection powers.

After helping to secure 116 countries to co-sponsor a draft resolution calling for an independent review and examination of the origins of COVID-19, the Morrison Government has renewed its push to beef-up the powers of the World Health Organisation.

Health Minister Greg Hunt (pictured) was expected to speak to the World Health Assembly overnight in favour of the draft resolution proposed by the European Union and highlight the need to bolster the power of officials to investigate new diseases.

"We need to learn the lessons from this pandemic and ensure we have the strongest possible global health architecture, with an enhanced ability to prevent and respond to future outbreaks," he was expected to say.

"This could include an examination of whether the WHO's mandate and powers, including around inspection, need to be strengthened to ensure WHO members have timely access to critical data." China denied WHO officials entry into Wuhan for almost a month after the first case of COVID-19 in December, and has remained reluctant to release detailed case data.

Mr Hunt's speech also highlighted the danger of wildlife wet markets. Foreign Minister Marise Payne yesterday confirmed the origins of the coronavirus pandemic - including which animals it passed through before infecting humans - will be examined if world leaders back the "comprehensive" draft resolution.

A motion in the draft resolution requests WHO director general Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus work closely with animal health and agriculture organisations to "identify the zoonotic source of the virus".

It also calls for an examination of "the route of introduction to the human population".

Deputy chief medical officer Professor Paul Kelly said he hoped a coronavirus review would put an end to the international blame game.

"I think the most important thing - rather than apportioning blame to one particular country or another country - is that we get to the bottom of what's happened," he said. While it is possible the pressure of the broad coalition built by Australia will force China's hand to support the review, there remains a chance it will further anger Beijing, which could result in further retaliation on trade.