THE South Sydney Rabbitohs will slowly ease old super coach Wayne Bennett out of -recruitment negotiations.

The seven-time premiership-winning coach enticed Queensland Origin forward Jai Arrow to join the club next season but it will probably be the last deal he does.

Bennett is moving on when his contract expires after next season and there is a long history of players often following him when he switches clubs. Last year centre James Roberts and edge forward Jaydn Su'A came from the Broncos to join him at the Rabbitohs. He also tried to bring budding Brisbane superstar David Fifita to Redfern.

When Bennett left St George Illawarra in 2010 to join the Newcastle Knights, he took Darius Boyd, Alex McKinnon and Adam Cuthbertson. Jeremy Smith came a year later.

From Newcastle back to the Broncos, he took Boyd and Travis Waddell. The Rabbitohs are in negotiations with Blues Origin star Cameron Murray - their future captain. They want him off the market -before he can talk to rivals in November.

His negotiations are being handled by football general manager Mark Ellison, chief executive Blake Solly and Jason Demetriou after the departure of Shane Richardson.

At some stage, assistant coach Demetriou will have to get even more involved because he takes over from Bennett in 2022.

Souths are also keen to lock down teenage sensation Joseph Suaalii, rated by many as the best 16-year-old footballer in the country and a future Greg Inglis.

Laurie's pride and joy for daughter FOOTY legend Laurie Daley says he has had fewer prouder moments in his life. Last week his daughter, Jaimee, graduated from the Goulburn Police Academy a probationary constable.

Daley's family couldn't attend the graduation due of COVID-19 restrictions, but there was no prouder parent in the country.

"Any time your kids achieve something like this, it's very special," Daley said. "She's excited but I'm a bit nervous. She's worked very hard to get there - like all police graduates - and I'm really proud."