They call it The Everest because it's a summit that should be all but impossible to reach. And the race certainly lived up to that moniker this year. When the coronavirus -pandemic hit, the future of the race seemed in doubt, as did so many other events in Sydney. Yet this weekend the Everest roared to life, with 11,000 fans celebrating the richest race in Australia and the richest turf race in the world.

Certainly the crowds could have been bigger and the empty seating was a reminder of the need for the government to get on with increasing the density allowed at restaurants and events heading into the holiday season. But to complain about that is, for the moment, a minor quibble that ignores the fact that NSW is now open for business in ways that make us the envy of much of the world. As the mercury - we hope - starts to turn more summery, we will see more such great events. The Golden Eagle. The NRL grand final. The State of Origin series. And so on.

And while it is fashionable to dismiss the idea that one individual can change the world, it is not too much of a stretch to say that Peter V'landys has -absolutely changed Sydney for the better - and shone a light for the rest of the nation as it emerges, blinking, into the light post-coronavirus.

V'landys proved to the -nation - take note, Dan -Andrews - that you don't have to live under the doona. You can declare that an event will happen on a certain date, safely, and see it through.

It's why after the NRL came back, perhaps the first major sporting code in the world to do so after the initial hit of COVID-19, leagues and codes around the world were ringing to find out just how we did it.

It's a lesson in grit, determination and backing yourself, not arrogantly, but with confidence - which is a spirit that some of our other jurisdictions could use a bit more of, to be frank.

And it's a demonstration that rather than a death sentence, COVID-19 is actually something that can be lived with and worked around with appropriate measures and, of course, a world-class contact tracing system backing it up. Coronavirus has been rough on all of us and we all look forward to the day when the rituals of social distancing and check-ins can be relegated to the past. But for the moment, if this is the new normal for NSW, we've got it pretty good.