THERE HASN'T BEEN A SPORTING YEAR LIKE IT. ANGUS MORRISON GETS OFF THE COUCH AND TRIES TO MAKE SENSE OF THE 12 MONTHS THAT HAVE PASSED HIM BY

JANUARY ■ New Year's Day and the first international sporting title of 2020 goes to Scotsman Peter Wright (he of the multi-coloured mohawk) at the PDC world darts championships in London. That is, if you think darts is a sport. Personally, I think if you can be obese and do it while drinking a pint, it's not a sport.

■ The first tennis grand slam gets under way in Melbourne, with defending champion Novak Djokovic and American Sofia Kenin taking the titles. Not much to cheer about for Aussie fans, but Dylan Alcott did win the wheelchair quad singles. At least the tennis gives everyone something to think about instead of those awful bushfires - good on Nick Kyrgios for leading the appeal for bushfire assistance. The year can only get better from here.

■ The Netball Nations Cup is played in England and won by New Zealand. Australia didn't take part, which suggests the name of the tournament needs a bit of work.

■ Super Rugby starts with the Brumbies edging the Reds 27-24 after being 10 behind at the break. Looking forward to this comp - it should be a beauty this year.

■ PANDEMIC UPDATE: Rumours of a dodgy-looking virus coming out of China. Probably just man-flu.

FEBRUARY ■ In the annual clash of helmets and shoulder pads, the Kansas City Chiefs win the Super Bowl with a 31-20 victory over the San Francisco 49ers in Miami. Chiefs quarterback Patrick Mahomes (below) is MVP. Ridiculously good, that bloke. It was the turn of Demi Lovato to murder the national anthem and J-Lo and Shakira provided the halftime entertainment that wasn't actually terrible.

■ Deontay Wilder and Tyson Fury go toe-to-toe again after that dodgy draw in their first fight. Wilder is a slight favourite but the Gypsy King is all over him, knocking him down twice before the American's corner throws in the towel in the seventh. Fury had earlier blamed a failed drug test on eating the meat of an uncastrated boar. What a load of balls.

■ The Six Nations kicks off in great style, with France beating England to wipe that smug grin off Eddie Jones's face.

■ In Super Rugby, the Tahs run in five tries to beat Johannesburg's Lions 29-17. I tell you, this is going to be a rugby season to remember.

■ PANDEMIC UPDATE: Definitely not visiting some place called Wuhan anytime soon. And if I do end up there, I'm not eating the bat soup. Rest of the world seems OK.

MARCH ■ The month when COVID-19 went from being a pain in the throat to a pain in the backside. Everything is being cancelled. Golf's Players Championship? Cancelled. The Australian Grand Prix? Cancelled. The world figure skating championships? Actually, that one was a good call.

■ The Brits are a bit slow on the uptake, though. Ban large gatherings, the scientists wailed. Yeah, all right, they said - but we've got just enough time to cram hundreds of thousands of punters into the four-day Cheltenham racing festival, and 54,000 into Anfield to watch Liverpool play Atletico Madrid in the Champions League. What's the worst that could happen, you ask? Now the country is plague central.

■ Verry Elleegant (above) wins the Tancred at Rosehill. Honestly, can't anyone spell these days?

■ The NRL season kicks off. The Warriors score zero points against the Knights. Could be a long season for the Kiwis. There's only time for two rounds. Bloody COVID.

■ The AFL season kicks off. For one weekend. And the Cats lose. Then it gets cancelled as well.

■ The Brumbies smash the Waratahs 47-14, and all the rugby gets cancelled. What's the point of life?

■ PANDEMIC UPDATE: Thanks for nothing, China. My hands are now consuming more alcohol than my mouth.

APRIL ■ Nothing of any note happens in the world of sport. The only international sport we can watch or bet on is Belarusian football because the country's president Alexander Lukashenko is a bona fide nut-job who thinks COVID can be cured by vodka. Turns out COVID is about the only thing that can't be cured by vodka. Everyone's favourite team Slutsk start the season well, but they were pretty quick to go down (behave).

■ PANDEMIC UPDATE: The neighbours seem to be building an extension purely out of toilet rolls.

MAY ■ Belarusian football is getting a bit boring. Luckily, the NRL starts up again. The Dragons are beaten 18-0 by the Warriors. Any team who can't score a point against the Kiwis should take up darts or some other non-sport. Synchronised swimming. The triple jump. Dressage. The Storm are beaten 22-6 by the Raiders. Looks like no title for the Victorians this year.

■ PANDEMIC UPDATE: The kids are being home-schooled. I've suspended both of them for squabbling. Amazon boss Jeff Bezos is now the richest man in the world and sent a personal letter of thanks to my wife.

JUNE ■ The first leg of American racing's Triple Crown, the Belmont Stakes, is won by Tiz The Law - the first New York-bred winner of the Belmont for 118 years. Which is also the single-most boring sporting statistic of 2020.

■ The Euros were supposed to start, but England will have to wait another year to not win a major football trophy.

■ At least the Premier League is back, with Liverpool simply having to turn up for the next six weeks to win the title. And there are no English football fans at the games. Bonus.

■ In the NRL, the Broncos are smashed 59-0 at Suncorp by the Roosters, who didn't even have James Tedesco in their line-up. Scary stuff from the Chooks. And the Storm lose 21-14 to Penrith. No chance for the title, those southern blokes.

■ The AFL starts up again, with a 36-36 draw between the Magpies and Richmond. Didn't they practise their kicking during the season break? Gary Ablett Sr could score 36 points by himself. In a quarter.

■ PANDEMIC UPDATE: I don't even know what month it is. Wish I had shares in Netflix and whoever makes Guinness.

JULY ■ Formula One is back! And Lewis Hamilton didn't win! The season opener in Austria goes to Valtteri Bottas, with Mercedes teammate Hamilton finishing fourth. Normal service soon resumes, with the Brit winning virtually everything for the rest of the season. He'll be knighted in January - it's a racing certainty.

■ Liverpool wins the Premier League title by a lot. Bournemouth, Watford and Norwich City are relegated, replaced by Leeds, West Brom and Fulham.

■ In the NRL, the Broncos are smashed 48-0 by Wests Tigers. I'm so old, I can remember when Brisbane could play footy. Lockyer, Langer, Lazarus, Thorn, Tallis … those blokes must be spinning.

■ The Olympics are starting in Tokyo! No, wait, they're not. They're off 'til next year. Or maybe the year after. Or maybe never, if we're all dead. And Wimbledon is off. No huge loss, that one. It's been rubbish since McEnroe retired.

■ PANDEMIC UPDATE: My teachers said I wouldn't amount to anything, but here I am, lying on the sofa, saving lives.

AUGUST ■ Lewis Hamilton wins the British Grand Prix. And the Spanish Grand Prix. And the Belgian Grand Prix. Just give him the bloody trophy.

■ Bayern Munich win the Champions League final against perennial chokers PSG, courtesy of a goal from former Paris player Kingsley Coman.

■ We even had a golfing major as the sporting world unsteadily got back on its feet, with Collin Morikawa, one year out of college, taking home the PGA Championship title. Not bad for a guy who can't even spell Colin.

■ Speaking of which, Verry Elleegant wins the Winx Stakes. That sure is some troubled spelling.

■ In the NRL, the Eels (left) beat the Storm 14-0. The Melbourne team must be 100/1 to take the title.

■ PANDEMIC UPDATE: Oh, thank god. They're starting to play some proper sports around the world. And American football.

SEPTEMBER ■ Frenchman Pierre Gasly wins the Italian Grand Prix from 10th on the grid to have one Finnish punter dancing in his lounge. The unnamed gambler put 24 cents (no Kerry Packer, this bloke) on a podium finish comprising Gasly first, Carlos Sainz second and Lance Stroll third. What, no Hamilton? No Bottas? No Verstappen? Are you mad? Apparently not, because that's how they crossed the line - at odds of 167,000/1.

It was the equivalent of predicting the next Rugby League World Cup will finish Lebanon 1, Portugal 2, Russia 3.

■ At somewhat shorter odds, Bryson DeChambeau - channelling his inner Thor - beat up the notoriously tough Winged Foot golf course in New York to win the US Open by six strokes. He was the only player to finish under par.

■ The Storm lose again - 30-22 to the Dragons - to surely end any hopes they have of winning the NRL title.

■ PANDEMIC UPDATE: Doctors are still telling us not to touch our faces, but that's virtually impossible if you have a can of beer in each hand.

OCTOBER ■ Richmond wins another AFL title with an 81-50 victory over Geelong in the grand final - at the Gabba of all places. And at night. The result probably shouldn't count for those two reasons. The Cats led by 22 points late in the second quarter, but could add only 15 points in the final two quarters as the Dustin Martin-inspired Tigers stormed to a third title in four seasons. Martin won the Norm Smith Medal in all three wins.

■ Speaking of handy players, LeBron James (right) leads the LA Lakers to the NBA title with a 4-2 finals win over the Miami Heat.

■ Revenge is sweet for Jose Mourinho as his new club, Spurs, spank the club who sacked him, Manchester United, 6-1. At Old Trafford. He was extremely humble afterwards, as we've come to expect.

■ If horses were played by Hollywood stars, Classique Legend would be George Clooney - the handsome grey devil. What a win in the The Everest at Randwick. And down south, Verry Elleegant wins the Turnbull Stakes. This horse is starting to p*** me off.

■ The Six Nations is finally completed and Eddie Jones is grinning smugly again. England wins the title, with the Irish players looking like they spent the off-season in the pub with free pies. Italy comes last. They've more wooden spoons than Jamie Oliver.

■ And the Melbourne Storm win the NRL Grand Final. Wait. What? ■ PANDEMIC UPDATE: For something made in China, this coronavirus sure is lasting a long time. Is it 2023 yet?

NOVEMBER ■ "Hey, Tiger! How on Earth did you shoot a 10 on a par-three?" "Because I missed the putt for a nine." For 15 minutes, Masters champion Tiger Woods played like the rest of us. In the final round at Augusta, he arrived at the par-three, 155-yard 12th hole in good shape - if a bit far back to trouble the leaders. His tee shot lands short of the green and spins back into Rae's Creek. Playing from the drop area, his third shot reaches the green but also spins back into the water. Think Kevin Costner in Tin Cup, but without Rene Russo to ogle.

Back at the drop area, he overcompensates and his fifth shot lands in the back bunker. From there, he chips across the green and back into the water. His balls spent more time in the water than David Hasselhoff's. Dustin Johnson wins the green jacket.

Aussie Cameron Smith is runner-up, becoming the first golfer in Masters history to shoot all four rounds in the 60s - 67, 68, 69, 69. I backed him at $90, but not each-way. There's a name for mugs like me. It's "mug".

■ The team tagged "the worst Queensland side in 40 years" upsets the highly rated Blues, winning the Origin series 2-1. Who else but Wayne Bennett to the rescue once more for the Maroons?

■ In cricket, the Mumbai Indians beat Delhi Capitals by five wickets in Dubai to win their fifth IPL title - as anyone with half a brain (rugby television match officials, for example) could have forecast at the start of the tournament when they saw Trent Boult and Jasprit Bumrah in the same bloody team.

■ Twilight Payment holds off the fast-finishing Tiger Moth to win the big one at Flemington. The horse I thought couldn't lose lost. And then got shot.

■ A week after the Wallabies were humiliated 43-5 by the All Blacks in Sydney, Dave Rennie's men (above) stun them 24-22 in Brisbane. New Zealand then get beaten by Argentina for the first time in, like, forever. Glorious stuff. This new coach of theirs, Ian Foster, should get a pay rise and a contract extension. He's bloody rubbish.

■ Lewis Hamilton (below) bags his seventh world Formula 1 title - equalling Michael Schumacher's record - with victory in the Turkish Grand Prix. A win in Bahrain - where Frenchman Romain Grosjean survived his car breaking into two pieces and exploding - means Hamilton won 11 of- the season's opening 15 races.

■ PANDEMIC UPDATE: Can't wait until my future grandchildren ask me what the pandemic of 2020 was like. "No idea, kids. I was drunk for most of it."

DECEMBER ■ The Premier League table is starting to take shape. Except it looks upside down. Spurs are top, West Ham fifth, and Southampton sixth. Pre-season favourites Manchester City are 11th, and Arsenal have slumped to 15th after their best (only good) player Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang started playing like his mum.

■ The Formula One drivers have finally found a way to beat Lewis Hamilton (below) - give him coronavirus.

Young Scottish driver George Russell was offered Hamilton's car for the Sakhir Grand Prix in Bahrain and it turned into a day he will never forget.

Russell smashed it in qualifying to start second on the grid, quickly took the lead in the race itself and look destined for a historic win. And then things went a bit pear-shaped.

While the cars were under a flag, Mercedes called Russell in to the pits for fresh tyres. Soon back on his way to a stunning victory, the call comes over the radio: "You have to come back in - we gave you the wrong tyres." Ouch.

A quick change and Russell emerges in fifth place, but the way he was driving, he could have easily passed four cars in 14 laps. Then he got a flat tyre. He finished ninth.

While all this was happening, Racing Point's Sergio Perez was winning his first F1 race in 190 attempts - no other winner in history has taken that many races to pop his cherry.

■ England beats the French reserves in injury time at Twickenham to win the inaugural Autumn Cup, proving once again that ugly rugby will more often than not beat attractive rugby.

■ The touring Indian cricket team - Kohli et al - is all out for 36 in their second innings in Adelaide in the first Test, handing Australia an eight-wicket win. You couldn't make this stuff up.

■ The IOC goes full woke and announces breakdancing will be a sport at the 2024 Paris Olympics. Which, in its own way, sums up 2020.

■ PANDEMIC UPDATE: If you read the rules a certain way, you're not allowed to have the holidays with the in-laws. That's my interpretation and I'm sticking with it.

MARCH NRL SEASON KICKS OFF OCTOBER RICHMOND WINS GRAND FINAL