THE prominent lawyer who represented 34 Essendon players during the 2013 peptide scandal will attempt to prove Parramatta's Michael Jennings' innocence.

Melbourne-based SC, Ben Ihle, was engaged by Jennings just hours after learning of his anti-doping breach yesterday.

Ihle (inset right) has represented athletes in some of Australia's biggest doping cases, including Commonwealth Games and Olympians, but most notably, players involved in the -Essendon drugs scandal that rocked the AFL.

Importantly for Jennings, Ihle also has intimate knowledge of anti-doping legislation having represented ASADA in the case against former St Kilda player Ahmed Saad.

Outside of sport, he -recently assisted in Victoria's COVID-19 hotel quarantine inquiry.

Ihle was chosen by Jennings and his agent Isaac Moses after the former NSW State of Origin star was suspended by the NRL after an A-sample test -returned a positive reading to two banned substances.

The Sunday Telegraph can also reveal Sports Integrity Australia dropped the bombshell on Jennings 12-hours -before he was due to play for Parramatta because they didn't want him scoring tries after he had knowingly tested positive to a banned substance.

Australia's sporting watchdog has been subject to widespread criticism from NRL fans as to why they chose the morning of last night's elimination final between the Eels and Rabbitohs to rock the -entire code.

Sharks CEO Dino Mezzatesta also entered the furore by questioning why it took SIA 18-days between Jennings' test and his A-sample being declared positive compared to the six months between the test and public notice of Cronulla's Bronson Xerri's doping -violation.

"There are questions that deserve to be answered about the timeline of what the case related to our club took and now this," Mezzatesta said.

"I appreciate they have a job to do, but I can understand why the public are in the dark when they see the large disparity in timing over the cases." SIA rarely, if at all, speak publicly on individual cases, but The Sunday Telegraph has learned SIA confronted Jennings a day after receiving his positive result.

An NRL statement confirmed the timeline of when Jennings was tested. "Mr Jennings was tested by Sport Integrity Australia (SIA) on 21 September 2020 with the positive result received by SIA on (Friday) 9 October 2020," the statement read.