Plea for good police to cop our respect Society has watched around the world protests that "Black Lives Matter". Yes they do, as do all lives matter.

The right to protest and express views in a free society is respected and should never be removed.

An aspect of exercising the right to protest, is protection of life and property while citizens lawfully demonstrate. This is the sworn duty of law enforcement officers in every country in the world.

The actions of those Minneapolis officers who were the catalyst for these protests can never be condoned nor excused and shall be dealt with in accordance with the law.

I am confident the vast majority of law enforcement officers around the world do not condone the unlawful and excessive actions of the minority.

When participating in protests and publicly expressing views spare a thought for those officers who by virtue of their office have been charged with protecting your lives and your property.

As a NSW police officer during the Vietnam War protests, the Springbok tours etc, I like many of my colleagues were simply doing our sworn duty, yet all the time silently supporting the right to protest and agreeing with the opinions of those protesting. I am sure nothing has changed - the right to protest is respected and police around the world agree "Black Lives Matter".

As a protester, respect police, they in the main respect you and your rights - they are undertaking their sworn duties to protect you and your property.

Together society can fix this if we all work together.

Garry J Dunne, Gymea

Second wave fears after health protection ignored I hope there is no second wave of COVID-19 traceable to the Black Lives Matter demonstrations on the weekend (Demo ban goes viral, 7/6). If so, there will be hell to pay.

No one denies that being able to protest is a democratic right despite that large-scale protests sometimes spawn demagogues capable of fomenting dangerous behaviour, looting and the like.

Indigenous incarceration rates, deaths in custody, police harassment and other such issues which are suppurating sores on our national psyche form the backdrop to the explosion of rage here following George Floyd's killing in the US.

However, we are in pandemic times - forms of protest respecting social distance provisions that are so crucial to preventing further deaths from this killer plague would surely have been more advisable.

Ron Sinclair, Bathurst

Wedding miss; protest bliss Well we were supposed to be married this past weekend, however coronavirus put a stop to that.

We had to cancel the restaurant we had hired including the chefs and wait staff. Outfits and flowers were put on hold. No celebrant nor hire vehicles.

Friends from near and far were put on hold and accommodation centres suffered. There is an abundance of economic-impacting factors from this decision to social distance us all.

But, all this could have gone ahead if I had just said it was a public demonstration.

Chris Walsh, Lindfield

Listen up or lose out Dire consequences will prevail for governments not acknowledging the concerns of their citizenry regarding blatant racism and police brutality.

Worldwide millions of people are peacefully protesting the social ills in their respective countries and for national leaders and their administrations to blissfully ignore this will only ensure their political demise.

Eric Palm, Gympie, Qld

A demo that could go viral Being from a non-white background I was all for the Black Lives Matter demonstration - but I didn't go because every life matters when there is a high chance of spreading the virus among demonstrators.

I really hope the demonstration doesn't go viral.

Sam Saidden, Parramatta

Communist claptrap So the Chinese Communist Party is advising the people of China not to visit Australia due to increases in racism (Trade minister rejects China racism claim, Online 6/6)?

A couple of things they should reflect on - Australia is a multicultural country with the majority of the population not caring if you are black, white or brindle.

Secondly, with the CCP's cover- up of the coronavirus, I dare say their foreign visitors and income will be severely slashed not only by reduced Australian tourist numbers but fewer visits from the international community.

Hopefully the Chinese community will wake up and realise the Chinese people are being used by a regime that is in it for themselves and not the wellbeing of the population.

Brad P, Woodlands

Nasty lies unconvincing Now, the Chinese government has warned its citizens not to travel to Australia as it has become unsafe for them do so (Trade minister rejects China racism claim, Online 6/6).

What a load of nonsense! Their citizens know we are a beautiful country, with kind peaceful people who wish no harm to others.

I am sure the Chinese people know this, and understand that their government is telling them a bunch of lies.

Graeme Walsh, Fairfield.

Slow food is all the rage Food shopping is taking me a bit longer these days (Wake up and ditch Chinese imports, 5/6).

Having a browse on the internet to see which companies are wholly owned by Australia before venturing out to the shops. Then looking at labels for countries of origin and reading the percentage of Australian ingredients used.

If we are to support Australian farmers and growers we all should be on board with this.

It might take a while to check and we may even pay a bit extra but you will know you have done your best to keep money here and support our own manufacturers and growers who have been doing it tough.

You might even prefer the taste and quality of the homegrown variety as opposed to the imports.

Marg Swindells, Castle Hill

Briefly … Australia has a new transportation option - the bandwagon. It has unlimited seating capacity for self- righteous celebrities and rent-a-crowd protesters. Best of all, it runs on the cheapest form of renewable energy known - symbolism.

Scott, Manly "" " There will always be people who are racist but maybe we could occasionally acknowledge that there are a lot of us out there who are not and treat people for who they are and not by the colour of their skin.

Jackie, Miranda "" " If a court can approve a 20,000 crowd to attend Sydney's Black Lives Matter rally, then it should be OK for the government to approve a crowd of up to 15,000 to attend football matches.

Terry Groves, Forster "" " There may be hundreds of protests all over the world highlighting "black lives matter" but until we (the people) change it's a waste of time and energy. Maybe start with listening, change of attitude, education and understanding.

Helen, Condobolin "" " Thanks Gladys, I presume the 20,000 activists allowed to demonstrate in Sydney CBD on Saturday now brings to an end our Wuhan virus health rules. We, who have abided by these rules for the sake of all are not amused.

Peter Cattlin, Freshwater "" " Could ARL boss Peter V'landys run some leadership training sessions for our state premiers? He has displayed a natural ability for it, while our premiers vary between "drunk with power", and scared to adopt a position! A few sessions with an expert might help.

Bruce Cramond, NSW

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001