THE NRL has given clubs a "how to guide" to assimilate back into the community as players prepare to break free from the bubble for the first time in six months.

Players have also been told they will need their house screened before they are allowed to resume pre-season training, giving the clearest indication yet that players will be back in a bubble after their break heading into the new season.

The NRL has put together a 15-page post-season "protocols and education" pack which allows the players to roam like normal citizens as soon as their season comes to an end.

Players have been unable to eat at restaurants, visit loved ones or even play golf under the game's strict biosecurity protocols in recent months.

For the likes of Brisbane and North Queensland a return to normality could happen as soon as Sunday while the rest of the non finals-bound teams such as St George Illawarra, Wests Tigers, Gold Coast, Canterbury, Manly and the Warriors will be 'free' by Wednesday at the latest.

Clubs have been given a three-day window following their final match to complete reviews and exit medicals before players are officially released from the bubble. Mad Monday is formally banned while end of season awards nights must comply with government regulations.

Players have been told that "new household screens and medicals must be performed for all players and staff" before the commencement of pre-season. It also states "Apollo training protocols for November and December will be dependent on community status at the time".

Players who are picked in Origin squads will need to be COVID-19 tested two days before entering camp. And those in the grand final will have little time to celebrate as they are required to be in Origin camp three days after the October 25 decider.

Given what the players have had to adhere to this year, they have been granted an extra week of leave. Players with three years or less experience get seven weeks and players with six or more years in the NRL have at least nine weeks off.

That means pre-season training must not commence until November 16 for those who were inside the bubble this year. Teams can return to training with players who were not in this year's bubble from November 9. The documents also warns players of the potential career-threatening side effects of contracting COVID-19.