A TSUNAMI of red ink has engulfed the Australian stock exchange as panicked investors take flight, handing the market its worst single-day rout in more than a decade.

In the biggest sell-off for any session since the depths of the global financial crisis in 2008, the benchmark ASX 200 index plunged 7.3 per cent yesterday.

The slump has dramatically extended the sell-off triggered by the coronavirus outbreak and left the bourse within a whisker of a "bear market".

It comes as a succession of bleak developments buffet sentiment at home and abroad and heighten fears the global economy is sliding into recession as the virus marches rapidly around the world.

The selling spree yesterday wiped $137.1 billion off the value of Australia's biggest listed companies. It takes to $418"billion the amount ripped from the market since February 20, when the ASX 200 was at a record high.

The index has since tumbled 19.6 per cent - a fraction short of the 20 per cent sell-off broadly regarded as a bear market.

Rattling investors, Italian authorities moved overnight Sunday to put swathes of that nation's north under quarantine as they ratcheted up efforts to slow the spread of the COVID-19 virus. The lockdown affects 16"million people, or more than a quarter of the Italian population.

Separately, oil prices plunged at the weekend after talks among nations that are major producers - aimed at curtailing supply to prop up a market foundering amid global recession fears - broke down.

Heavyweight ratings agency Moody's Investors Service published a report yesterday saying global recession risks had increased as the spread of COVID-19 resulted in "simultaneous supply and demand shocks".

Also yesterday, Westpac chief economist Bill Evans said he believed Australia was sliding into recession. The economy, without stimulus from taxpayers, was likely to shrink 0.3 per cent both this quarter and next, he said.

Mr Evans noted the federal government was due in coming days to announce a "policy response" as it moved to stimulate the economy, and said Westpac would then revise its forecast. He cautioned there was significant "uncertainty around these forecasts due to the unpredictable course of the outbreak".

In a research report, a team of Moody's analysts said the virus would "hurt economic growth in many countries" in the first half this year.

"Global recession risks have risen. The longer the outbreak affects economic activity, the demand shock will dominate and lead to recessionary -dynamics," they said.

"In particular, a sustained pullback in consumption, coupled with extended closures of businesses, would hurt earnings, drive layoffs and weigh on sentiment." In such a climate, the recessionary dynamics could become "self sustaining", Moody's said.

The ASX 200 has lost ground in 10 of the past 12 trading sessions, surrendering about 1400 points.

Over that period, it has shed all the gains it made in the previous 13 months: at 5760.6 points, it is back where it last sat in early January last year.

The major banks, which have been punished in the sell-off, were again in the crosshairs yesterday.

Shares in the big four fell more than 6"per cent, dragging them all deep into bear-market territory.

Mining titan BHP was also among those hit particularly hard as investors turned on resources companies following the breakdown of talks among oil-producing nations.

BHP shares tumbled 14.4"per cent.

Australia's biggest pureplay oil and gas producer, Woodside Petroleum, cratered 18.4"per cent, while Origin Energy plunged 15.8 per cent.

Fund management heavyweight Fidelity International yesterday said a "worse-case scenario appears to be unfolding for oil markets".

"Expectations of a demand shock due to the global outbreak of the COVID-19 coronavirus collided over the weekend with an anticipated supply surge," the said.peter.taylor@news.com.au