Another flag, another Norm Smith Medal, and top honours in our 2020 Australian list for Dusty 1 DUSTIN MARTIN Richmond, AFL Turned the 2020 AFL Grand Final on its head as he inspired Richmond to its third premiership in four years with an extraordinary second-half performance. The 29-year-old kicked four goals and became the first player in history to win three Norm Smith Medals. Peerless among our nation's footballers for delivering when it matters most.

2 CAMERON SMITH Melbourne Storm, NRL The will-he-or-won't-he retirement speculation didn't affect the Melbourne Storm captain, who led his team brilliantly to its third premiership in eight years. The 37-year-old continued to defy the critics and even scored a try - the 48th of his career in his 430th game - for good measure in the decider.

3 MEG LANNING Cricket The captain of our T20 World Cup-winning team, a side that was recognised with The Don Award earlier this month as the Australian sports performer whose deeds most inspired our nation in 2020. Lanning also led Australia to a world-record 21st consecutive ODI victory this year with a clean sweep of the three-match series against New Zealand in October. An outstanding leader.

4 RICHIE PORTE Cycling Became only the second Australian to stand on the podium at the Tour de France. The Tasmanian has had his share of heartache in the event, crashing out in 2017 and 2018. But the 35-year-old had his career-defining moment this year when he finished third in the general classification.

5 CAMERON SMITH Golf Augusta is the measuring stick in world golf. If you can light it up at the US Masters, then you're a serious player, and that's exactly what the 27-year-old from Brisbane did. Smith became the first player in the tournament's history to shoot four consecutive rounds in the 60s on his way to finishing tied for second behind Dustin Johnson.

6 SAM KERR Football One of the most potent strikers in woman's football. The Australian superstar moved from the American NWSL to English giant Chelsea on a reported $500,000-a-season contract this year. It has been a successful move, with the Blues claiming the FA Women's Super League title, the Women's League Cup and the Women's Community Shield.

7 DYLAN ALCOTT Tennis The Melburnian collected his sixth straight Australian Open title in January and, while sidelined by the COVID-19 shutdown, wasn't going to let anything stop him getting back on the court. He jetted to France in October under strict health measures and brought the French Open trophy home for a second time.

8 STEWART McSWEYN Athletics Announced himself in 2020 as Australia's most exciting middle-distance runner since Craig Mottram. Broke three national records - in the 1500m, 3000m and 10,000m - and dominated a world-class field in Doha to show he is in the medal frame for the Tokyo Olympics.

9 LIZ CAMBAGE Basketball A massive presence on and off the hardwood, Cambage's ability to dominate all levels of the sport is largely unparalleled. The Opals and WNBA superstar added a WNBL title with the Southside Flyers. The 29-year-old is a proven source for points, rebounds and intimidation.

10 DANIEL RICCIARDO Motor racing The 31-year-old West Australian is the biggest name in Australian motorsport. The Renault Formula One driver is still regarded as a future world champion and is a global name. He finished fifth in the drivers' world championship points standings in 2020, his highest placing since 2017. Ricciardo will join McLaren next year - his fifth team in 10 seasons - after signing a multi-year deal.

11 ALYSSA HEALY Cricket Named female ODI player of the year in February, Healy followed up by helping Australia claim the ICC's T20 World Cup title in March. The 30-year-old put her side on the path to victory with a brutal 75 off just 39 balls in the final against India at the MCG, an innings that saw her named player of the match. A serious force.

12 CAMERON MUNSTER Melbourne Storm, NRL Two premierships, two Origin shields, a World Cup and World Club Challenge silverware on the mantelpiece before his 27th birthday is something to behold. The Melbourne Storm superstar is the fresh face of the NRL heavyweights and not without a chance of captaining the Storm in years to come. Something good usually happens when Munster - a more natural footballer than most - is involved.

13 STEVE SMITH Cricket The cricket superstar notched back-to-back tons - 104 off 64 balls and 105 off 66 - in Australia's one-day series win over India in November. Those knocks took his tally of limited-overs centuries this year to three, the most among the Australians. He was also nominated for the Sir Garfield Sobers Award for ICC Male Cricketer of the Decade, and also for Test cricketer of the decade. The jury is out on whether he will captain Australia again after the ball-tampering scandal, but he remains hugely influential.

14 TYLER WRIGHT Surfing Wright ends 2020 as the No.1-ranked female surfer in the world. Just this month she claimed her second Maui Pro crown to cap off a stellar COVID-affected year. The NSW surfer is on the verge of her third world title. The 26-year-old is our best surfer since Mick Fanning and Steph Gilmore, and plenty more success beckons.

15 LACHIE NEALE Brisbane Lions, AFL The Brisbane Lions star won the Brownlow Medal in 2020. Daylight was second. Before the count, Neale was the unbackable favourite with TAB, and with good reason. Neale won by 10 votes after one of the most dominant individual seasons in recent memory. The prolific ball-winner became an inspirational midfielder, kicking several huge goals in big games. Set an enormous standard this year.

16 JYE McNEIL Horse racing McNeil rode into the history books atop Twilight Payment when the pair combined to capture this year's Melbourne Cup. McNeil stole an early lead in an unforgettable and bold tactical ride that rewarded him with the biggest prize in Australian racing. The previous all-the-way winner was Might And Power in 1997. McNeil is only 25. We're sure to hear a lot more of him.

17 ADAM ZAMPA Cricket Zampa was Australia's leading white-ball bowler in a year in which we played just two Test matches. The leg-spinner is a permanent fixture in our ODI and T20 international teams, after taking 38 wickets at 23.6 from 22 games in 2020. With a T20 World Cup scheduled for 2021, the 28-year-old looms as one of our most important short-form players.

18 ASH BARTY Tennis A strong start to 2020 with a semi-final home slam berth was sunk - like most things - by COVID, but there's no arguing with the numbers. Barty was the top women's tennis player in the world from wire to wire this year, and she even presented the premiership cup to her favourite AFL team, Richmond. Worthy of a beer or two, we reckon.

19 BEN SIMMONS Basketball One of Australia's highest-paid sportsmen since being selected as the No.1 NBA draft pick in 2016 by the Philadelphia 76ers, and continued to hold a strong presence on the global sporting stage in 2020. The two-time NBA All-Star was crowned Rookie of the Year in 2018. Simmons is averaging 16.4 points, 8.3 rebounds and eight assists across three NBA seasons.

20 JAMES TEDESCO Sydney Roosters, NRL It takes a team and luck to win a premiership (in any sport), but the breathtaking brilliance of Tedesco was a big reason why the Chooks went back to back in the 2018-19 NRL seasons. The explosive, hard-running fullback has been the benchmark for No.1s since the retirement of Billy Slater. Tedesco scored 11 tries in 19 games for the Roosters in 2020 and led the NRL in tackle breaks, line-break assists, and run metres. The speedster ranked second in runs overall and kick return metres.