TWO moments of brilliance from Titans skipper Jamal Fogarty in the dying stages of the match propelled the Titans to a 14-10 win over the Dragons last night that all but ended the Red V's finals hopes.

The Dragons enjoyed a mountain of possession all night - they were tackled inside the Titans' 20-metre line a whopping 44 times - but all they had to show for it was a 10-4 lead heading into the final five minutes.

The Titans, who were under siege all night, finally levelled the scores in the 75th minute through Tyrone Peachey.

Dragons prop Josh Kerr appeared to have the ball covered after a Fogarty kick, but fumbled into the goalposts to present Peachey with an absolute gift of a four-pointer.

From the next set, AJ Brimson surged up the middle into the clear and found Fogarty in support - and this time there was no Josh Papalii to run him down, with the 26-year old scoring next to the posts.

It was a stirring victory from the Titans and puts the final nail in the Dragons finals chances - if Cronulla beat North Queensland on Saturday, Dean Young's men will be three wins out of the eight with four games to play.

GOODNIGHT SAINTS The Dragons may be a mathematical chance to make the finals, but it would take a miracle for them to get into the eight from here.

The Red V have nobody but themselves to blame given the amount of possession they enjoyed, with halves Adam Clune and Corey Norman failing to create any meaningful attack or build pressure through their kicking games. It's been a valiant effort from the Dragons to rebound after their horror start to the year, but to have their finals chances ended in such a fashion is a serious disappointment.

TITANIC EFFORT The Dragons led 2-0 at the break after a tight first-half, with a Zac Lomax penalty all that separated the two teams.

But the Red V had more than enough field position to put some points on the board - the Titans showed commendable spirit in defence, turning the Dragons away time and again.

A last-ditch tackle from Keegan Hipgrave on Clune after the St George Illawarra halfback danced through off a scrum and seemed certain to score was a particular highlight.

In the end, the pressure had to tell. Jacob Host finally crossed in the 47th minute after the Dragons had four consecutive sets on the Titans line, but they scored themselves through Phillip Sami moments later.

Such effort has become more common under coach Justin Holbrook, who was handed a three-year contract extension during the week.

FRIZZ STANDS TALL Given what we all know he's capable of, it's been an up and down season for Dragons backrower Tyson Frizell.

A Test and Origin regular, and one of the Dragons biggest names, Frizell signed with Newcastle for 2021 during the COVID-19 lay-off and has not always been able to find his best form since.

But as the hard-nosed backrower played like a man possessed last night, churning through 133m from 16 carries

TITANS 14 DRAGONS 10 TITANS TRIES: P SAMI 50', T PEACHEY 75', J FOGARTY 77' GOALS: J FOGARTY DRAGONS TRIES: J HOST GOALS: Z LOMAX 3