AS the sun sets on the first day of the new President of the United States its abundantly clear there has never been a more monumental occasion for the leader of the Free World.

Joe Biden starts his new job with the weight of expectation of a world wanting him to return some gravitas to the Oval Office.

Those who despised Trump will also want Mr Biden to make grand gestures and policy changes that are the antithesis of the Trump era.

There will also be those who become preoccupied with revenge for revenge's sake against a president they believe tainted the job, and indeed, democracy forever.

Those are the interest groups Mr Biden has to withstand.

It is one thing for justice to rightfully take its course and for Mr Trump to pay his dues for any unlawful activity and behaviour unbefitting a President - of which there are surely many. But Mr Biden's primary responsibility now is to correct the ship and, at the risk of sounding like a CNN soundbyte, unify as best he can a country which is still torn by anger, an anger which won't dissipate just because Mr Trump has left office.

The trap for Mr Biden and his team will be to mistake dealing with the radicals who stormed the Capitol as the main game. They are a sideshow, albeit a sideshow that has to bear the full force of the law. But a sideshow nonetheless.  Priority No.1, of course, is bringing COVID-19 under control, administering a successful vaccination program and using America's clout to ensure the investigation into the pandemic's origins is thorough and conclusive.

There needs to be no more ambiguity around the seriousness of the pandemic and its impact on families, jobs and the US health system coming from the Oval Office, which has up to now given strength to the ridiculous fringe groups such as the anti-mask movement. It is arguable that had the pandemic not occurred Mr Trump was on track to deliver on his promise of jobs growth and middle America prosperity and although that job has become a lot harder than it was it must remain a top priority for any government espousing the virtues of a united country. It is also incumbent on Mr Biden to restore some dignity and hope to the office - and in turn to the voters - that goes beyond a Hallmark verse. And, as simple as that sounds, it's often too easy a route for administrations that follow a term of government that was so laden down with unnecessary conflict and disappointment. America is going to need more than that.