PETER V'landys has confirmed it could be just 42 days before the NRL is back as the Project Apollo team get ready to deliver a rugby league miracle on May 21.

And in another stunning development ahead of today's crucial Project Apollo meeting, The Daily Telegraph understands that the NRL is leaning towards a 15 round competition where every team plays each other once - as opposed to the two conference option. This would include having State of Origin played in the middle stage of the season.

As revealed exclusively in yesterday's Daily Telegraph, there is an increasingly likelihood that all Sydney-based players will be allowed to live in their homes and not in a bubble-type environment.

This would also be the case for the Canberra Raiders and Newcastle Knights players if teams are not forced into lockdown. Raiders star Josh Hodgson said players "have a duty" to get back on the field quickly.

"This is for everyone, not just us footy players but the community," said Hodgson, who only moved into a new house on Tuesday.

And while border restrictions most likely will force teams outside NSW and Canberra to relocate in Sydney for an expected period of two weeks, it is hoped they also can return to their home bases after that and travel by chartered flights on game day.

This is all due to the continued CONTINUED PAGE 88 FROM BACK PAGE drop in COVID-19 percentages in NSW with the daily increase in cases now 1.79 per cent compared to 22.27 per cent when the competition was suspended after round two.

It was initially thought the NRL would be lucky to return as early as July but that was then brought forward to May 28. Now it is likely to kick off another week earlier.

"I am optimistic (the season could be back playing on May 21)," V'landys said. "The committee is considering that (today) and I don't want to pre-empt any of their recommendations, but that is a possibility, yes." V'landys would not speculate on what the competition draw would be, although the 15-round draw was now the preferred option ahead of the two conference system.

"I will be happy with whatever recommendation they come up with," V'landys said. "The most important thing for me is restarting the season.

"We want to get everyone's spirits back up. You have to -inspire people." NSW deputy premier John Barilaro said he would work with the NRL to get it restarted. "I think the NRL is the tonic that we need to get through this crisis," Barilaro told Nine News last night.

Following a morning meeting of the Project Apollo team, it is expected a recommendation will be put to the Commission and that will be followed by a club hook-up.

The NRL has also been in high level talks with government officials who are expected to clear a path for the New Zealand Warriors to relocate to Australia. While the Warriors will have to go into self-isolation for two weeks as part of the strict Australian border controls, they will be allowed to train together as a team.The NRL is hoping that all Australian teams will be -allowed to return to their home bases by mid to late June and travel to games on -chartered flights.