WITH the NRL's highly anticipated return just three days away, ARL Commission chairman Peter V'landys has revealed his next huge mission: get paying members back at games from July 1, and sponsors even sooner.

The stunning V'landys revelation will be a massive shot in the arm for footy-starved fans.

While clubs have copped some backlash for asking members to keep up their -financial support through the COVID-19 shutdown, V'landys wants to reward those fans for their loyalty.

Asked if he had a specific date in mind for crowds to -return, V'landys said: "I am going to aim for July 1 to see what we can do.

"We want the sponsors in there as quickly as possible.

"You are allowed so many people so we will start looking at that with the biosecurity measures in the coming weeks. And I am not saying capacity crowds. I have to stress capped crowds.

"That is one way you can reward the members that have stuck firm." While V'landys has been questioned and even ridiculed for his determination to get the game back up and running, he said he always had a plan to open the game back up to the fans.

"There were a lot of things in my head when I went with the 20 rounds (schedule)," he said. "One was to make the competition credible. Two to go as late as possible into October so we can get a grand final with a crowd and then State of Origin with a crowd. That was always in my head.

"And, touch wood, and thank God so far, I have predicted accurately. "I said we'd be able to stay in Queensland. I said we'd stay in Victoria. I said we wouldn't need bubbles.

"So everything we have said has come to fruition. The last puzzle now is the crowds." Asked about how many members would be allowed to attend games, V'landys said: "It depends on the ground and how far you can distance them.

"In ANZ you might be able to get 20,000 with social distancing, whereas somewhere like Kogarah you might get 5000. I am only guessing these figures, but it is absolutely on the radar. That is the next challenge.

"But I want to reward the members of the clubs. As I have said many times, people who give me loyalty I give it back in spades. Those members who have stayed loyal, I will be rewarding." Under the revised draw, round eight starts on July 2 and the NRL already has -venues locked in until the end of round nine.

So the NRL will still have to work out how this can happen fairly given most clubs will have more members than potential available tickets.

For instance, at a club like South Sydney with 28,000-plus members they might initially have to take it in turns to attend the home games, or the NRL might split the fans from both clubs.

But V'landys has shown he will move mountains to make the seemingly impossible possible, as he did with getting the NRL back so early, so members have every reason to trust his intentions.

"I have to be careful to say they are capped (crowds) and with social distancing," V'landys said. "But once pubs and clubs are in full swing, there is no reason why we can't." 2020 NRL CLUB MEMBERSHIPS South Sydney: 28,413 Brisbane: 27,463 Parramatta: 27,104 Melbourne: 21,650 Canberra: 19,039 Penrith: 18,906 Newcastle: 18,139 Wests Tigers: 17,776 North Queensland: 16,709 Sydney Roosters: 15,189 Canterbury: 15,170 St George Illawarra: 15,035 Manly: 12,703 New Zealand: 12,673 Cronulla: 9768 Gold Coast: 7836