THE NRL's Project Apollo team is ready to deliver a State of Origin game to Queensland under high-level plans to celebrate the 40-year legacy of Maroons Immortal Arthur Beetson.

The Sunday Telegraph can reveal "Project Artie" is underway, with the Queensland Rugby League having held talks with Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk to push for an Origin game to be played at Suncorp Stadium this season.

And the move has the backing of ARL Commission chairman Peter V'landys, who is working on a schedule that has provisions for one Origin game at Queensland's home of rugby league this year.

V'landys will meet with Palaszczuk in the next fortnight in a move to open the Sunshine State's borders to rugby league.

The Queensland government has put out the welcome mat to rugby league in one of the most significant steps to overcoming COVID-19 border restrictions to revive the NRL competition on May 28.

Premier Palaszczuk caused a storm this week when she claimed Queensland had no hope of hosting State of Origin this season, a scenario that also appeared to deliver a hammer blow to the resumption of the NRL. But The Sunday Telegraph can reveal the Queensland government is open to a proposal from the NRL and Origin, and V'landys has vowed to table a considered plan to allow rugby league's Project Apollo mission to take off.

A Queensland government spokesman told The Sunday Telegraph last night the Premier is ready for dialogue with the ARL Commission and will consider a submission for NRL travel north of the border.

State of Origin is due to celebrate its 40th anniversary this season. Game three at Suncorp Stadium was pencilled in for July 8, the very day Beetson famously led the Queensland side on to Lang Park in the inaugural Origin clash in 1980.

The pandemic has thrown the QRL's planned celebrations into disarray and there are fears that Queensland's strict border controls could see all three Origin games played in NSW as a contingency.

But V'landys told The Sunday Telegraph he is determined to reward fans with an Origin clash on Beetson's Queensland soil, especially if a mooted series in October provides scope for a full house at Suncorp.

"I think we will have an Origin game in Queensland," V'landys said. "Beetson was a legend so it would be great to celebrate an Origin game up there. When we can show the (Queensland) Premier there are no biosecurity concerns, I'm sure we can be on the same page on State of Origin."Asked whether Origin would be played in October, V'landys said: "I can't comment on Origin in October. That's one of the discussions points with broadcasters and we have agreed to remain confidential until we have an agreement."