Chinese diplomats have a tradition of avoiding offence. They are known for delicacy and tact, even beyond usual diplomatic demands.

Deputy head of mission at the Chinese Embassy, Minister Wang Xining, yesterday did his level best to destroy that image during a speech at Canberra's National Press Club.

Wang, China's version of Iraq's famously fact-averse Comical Ali, alternated in his speech between pure fiction and a drama queen level of self-pity.

The maladroit diplomat claimed Australia's call for an independent review into the origins of the coronavirus "hurt the feelings" of the Chinese people.

"At latest count COVID-19 has killed 800,000 people worldwide and caused economic disruption on a scale not seen since the Great Depression," Dave Sharma, the Member for Wentworth, responded "If getting to the bottom of what caused this generates some 'hurt feelings', I think that is the least of our concerns." Wang said Australia's call for an investigation was a "shocking proposal." Yet Australia's only aim is to learn exactly how the virus began and was spread. How shocking is that?

Wang also took issue with Australia identifying the city of Wuhan as the source of the -initial coronavirus outbreak.

Although Wang noted the virus was "first identified in China" and "first reported in China", he claimed that did not mean Wuhan was the source.

He said researchers should be given the space to "find out the origin". Maybe Wang and the Chinese government would -prefer it if researchers begin their search in Tenterfield, or perhaps the Blue Mountains.

Anywhere but Wuhan. Still, if Wang insists on researchers being allowed to seek the origin of the virus, we can make that a part of the independent review.

Elsewhere in his speech, Wang said China "respects Australia sovereignty". "As China's sovereignty was constantly under threat and -disarray from external powers, the last thing China wants to do is to inflict on others what China suffered," he said. "Or to bully others as we were bullied." Oh, please. Someone buy this bloke a laptop and boot up some recent footage from Hong Kong. Or some old footage from Tiananmen Square. China inflicts suffering on its own people. With the virus, it has taken that policy global.