IT is the $179 backyard basketball ring that has slam-dunked rugby league tradition by turning a left-edge forward into a potent aerial try-scoring weapon.

In a bid to improve his leaping and agility, Panthers forward Viliame Kikau was asked by club head of performance Hayden Knowles to practise basketball slam-dunking at the local courts during the COVID-19 shutdown.

When the courts were closed due to coronavirus, Kikau shelled out $179 for a basketball hoop in his own Western Sydney backyard.

The 118kg behemoth filmed himself flying through the air to dunk and sent it to Knowles.

"It just showed ridiculous athleticism. He is a freakish athlete," Knowles said. "He has actually used the break to get better." Kikau used his skills to good effect on the weekend when he leapt to grab a Nathan Cleary bomb and score the match-winning try against Melbourne.

He has essentially become the first forward to become what is known as an offence kick target. Knowles even sent the footage of Kikau's backyard basketball exploits to teammates in an effort to encourage them to improve their agility work.

South Sydney have completed their homework on the Kikau high jump before tonight's big game at Jubilee Oval, Kogarah.

"In the break, we encouraged the boys to stay athletic by sending video around to everyone of Kikau slam- dunking a basketball," Knowles said.

"I was using 'Kiks' to inspire the rest of the squad. That video of him - at 118kg, a single-leg jump, take-off and slam-dunk a basketball on a 10-foot ring - it just showed ridiculous athleticism. It's so impressive.

"He is now a kick target, isn't he? Last week they were probably covering the kick for (Panthers centre) Stephen Crichton and the next minute Kikau flew in to catch the ball.

"That just gives the opposition more of a threat. Usually you're worried about wingers and centres. Now you're worried about Kikau as well.

"I encouraged him to play basketball in the break. He started doing it in the Penrith area until council ripped down the basketball rings during the COVID break, so he bought some rings for his own backyard.

"He has no shame in letting you know he can slam-dunk a basketball. He probably takes pride in that.

"I had a separate WhatsApp group over the break - which was all about athletic development and challenging each other - and I sent them Kikau slam-dunking a basketball.

"A wrecking ball who can do that. It was pretty cool." Kikau has become one of the NRL's most damaging players. Sadly, he arrived in Australia from Fiji at age 16 and is ineligible for Origin.

With a "flying mop" haircut, Kikau is preparing to terrorise the Rabbitohs. "He comes in weighing 118kg and you hear that number and think that could be a bit overweight," Knowles said. "But when he takes his shirt off, you're looking at a six-pack. Kikau is a freakish talent. We love him.

"He has always been focused but has really latched on to the influence of James Fisher-Harris and Zane Tetevano. He has taken their lead. Instead of me being on his back, he would have Fisher-Harris on his back, or Tetevano, to go training.

"Kikau is doing more of the effort-type stuff people mightn't know him for. He is fitter than normal. He made a decision in the break to get better and he's turned into a better player. We love his attitude." After last week's game, Panthers coach Ivan Cleary spoke glowingly about Kikau. "Villie is a pretty special type of specimen," Cleary said. "He is 118kg or whatever and we have all seen some of the stuff he can do. He is only young too so it is good times ahead." Cleary has a terrible record against South Sydney's Wayne Bennett, winning just three of their past 15 clashes.