Fears for a nation being torn apart Reading both Andrew Bolt and Tim Blair's poignant articles on the civil unrest in America (1/6), I'm reminded of an observation my father once made that the USA had both the best and worst of everything.

How true that sentiment has proved in recent days. Whereas thousands of pairs of hands rightly applauded healthcare workers for their efforts in dealing with COVID-19, those restless hands are now destroying the livelihoods of shop owners and seeking to attack the very people - black and white - who are called upon in a time of emergency to preserve human life.

Why has this recent tragedy been perceived by the masses in various cities as granting a seal of approval to reduce the property of others to ruins?

Is the best way to respond to police incompetence really by razing local infrastructure, graffitiing public buildings, raiding convenience stores and stealing electronic goods?

I greatly fear America will further retreat into a toxic tribalism, where citizens are suspicious of each other and the worst is assumed about the men and women who serve in the often volatile vocation that is public law enforcement.

Peter Waterhouse, Craigieburn

" "" The violence and looting under the guise of protest is doing nothing to honour the memory of George Floyd.

If anything, it is reinforcing the stereotype of why police come down hard in some areas (although there is no excusing illegal police behaviour).

Mr Floyd's avoidable death was an absolute disgrace, but stealing from and destroying the businesses of innocent people, is abhorrent and has nothing to do with racism.

K Baker, Engadine

Lab security is an issue globally - not just China I was somewhat alarmed after reading Sharri Markson's virus origins story, where it was revealed that "accidents do occur" in the world of security of sensitive biological agents (Lab leaks happen: former spy chief, 1/6).

Nothing is proven, but it appears the Wuhan virus outbreak could be centred around the Wuhan Institute of Virology, but what is equally disturbing appears to be the fact that other "accidents" have happened at "level 4" facilities globally.

As stated, any review or probe of the Wuhan virus should encompass all such biosecurity laboratories, worldwide.

It's not good enough that lax containment measures and breaches of security protocols in these types of facilities, can and have endangered the world.

Peter Cattlin, Freshwater

Beijing's mangled message I love some of the phrases coming out of the Chinese Communist Party these days. Australians being chewing gum on a Chinese shoe was nicely graphic and the image of Australia as a kangaroo that is actually a species of American canine, while convoluted, was also beguiling.

However, currently running in first place for the Mangled-Message Cup, the state-run Global Times invented a fascinating take on US foreign policy describing it as so extreme as to be "nothing less than chronic suicide" (Pro-China supporters see red over US sanctions, 1/6).

Repetitively committing suicide would be an astounding feat in itself but it's the reassuring little "nothing less than" that takes the cake - like people promising you they are telling you the "literal truth".

Robert T. Walker, Wagga Wagga

Walking on eggshells There was really no need for a new report to show that our universities have only themselves to blame for putting all their "financial eggs" into the foreign student basket (Universities learning a harsh lesson of their own: report 1/6).

Even high school business studies students are taught about the risks of 'too many eggs in one basket' strategy.

Steve Ngeow, Chatswood

Wanted: intellectual rigour The Western world is reaping what we have sown by not fighting to stop emotions, ideologies and immature egos elbow aside facts, logic and good science.

No longer bastions of free speech, our universities suspend people like academic Peter Ridd and student protester Drew Pavlou for speaking out against unjust or unscientific activities.

Reasoned public debate is nigh on impossible on subjects like climate and energy as those opposing the orthodoxy are sneered at, de-platformed or simply ignored by much of the press and academia, irrespective of the quality of their arguments.

And now in the US, legitimate anger and disgust at some police brutality has been turned into an excuse for looting, arson, violence and abuse of political opponents, often under the umbrella of "protest".

The root cause of these and many other social ills is the lack of intellectual rigour in our schools, universities and society where facts and reason are too often subordinated to opinions, emotions and the blaming of others for personal inadequacies. In short, it's time for societies everywhere to grow up and face reality again.

Doug Hurst, Chapman, ACT

Leading by example Where are we, at a Dutch auction, or is it just political buy-off? Offering our frontline workers $1000-a-head as 'hush-money' is hardly the way to govern at a time when the government needs to show strength and determination (Pay of peace, 1/6). It's a time for tough leadership, not tap dancing and compromise.

Premier Gladys Berejiklian could have avoided this situation had she set the example by having her political colleagues and senior bureaucrats take a 10-20 per cent pay cut for 12 months - it's called leading by example.

With this behind her she could have more easily justified the deferral of the public sector wage increase.

John George, Terrigal

Time for Oz-buy law Recent events have led businesses and governments to question their over reliance on China, in the supply chain of required materials and stock.

Simply put, Australia needs to supply Australia. How?

Simple. Make governments buy Australian made goods (Treasurer tells bean counters buy Aussie, 30/5). Set a mandatory level of local procurement for all supplies. Tenders could be called for all goods. Set a target, for example a 50 per cent supply within five years.

Yes the products will cost more than cheaper imports but the money will circulate throughout the economy, providing jobs, taxes, profits, economic independence and national pride.

For instance, every piece of government furniture, for schools and office should be made in Australia of recycled plastics. This would be a beginning in using our abundance of plastic waste.

Let's start there and move on to all the myriad of government- bought product. Peter Franklin, Byron Bay Briefly … NRL supporters have been quick to blame referees over the years for their performances. Over the weekend the standard of refereeing with one referee was first class. Well done to everyone involved.

Glenn Copson, Eglinton

" "" Talk about pent up frustrations over lockdowns (Ignited States of America, 1/6). The bleeding obvious no one has mentioned - it is why they have gone nuts and now let's see how many get the virus with their group protests.

Sandra, Leichhardt " "" Rioting, violence, arson, looting are not protesting - these are criminal acts and should be treated as such (Ignited States of America, 1/6).

Peter Wilcox, Blayney " "" Ben Fordham is a brilliant replacement for Alan Jones. Loved his first up interview with PM Scott Morrison. Asked to comment on what was happening in America, the PM wisely said Martin Luther King would not have been into the rioting - that should satisfy left and right Geoff Hinds, Merrylands

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001