Powerful elites and media barons in WA have all but muted criticism of China, writes Jane Marwick

You'd think a billionaire springing a Chinese Communist Party diplomat on a federal government minister would be front page news in his home state.

But not in WA, where the only daily newspaper and top-rating nightly news are influenced by another billionaire and fellow China enthusiast.

When Andrew Forrest presented the Victorian Consul-General to China at a federal government press conference on Wednesday, observers were stunned. Except those who live in Western Australia, where kowtowing to the Chinese government is presented as normal.

Having heard that Health Minister Greg Hunt was hosting a press conference with the WA iron ore magnate, I sat down to watch and record the circus.

Not only did Mr Forrest invite Consul-General Long Zhou as a guest, he introduced him at the podium, where Mr Long proceeded to address the media. Hunt was reportedly blindsided by the stunt. He certainly looked uncomfortable.

Shocked by the seemingly audacious move, the nation's media sprang into action. I found that reaction a relief.

Because this was not the first time that Mr Forrest had acted in this way. But it's the first time the rest of the nation has seen it.

On April 1 (yes, April Fool's Day), in announcing the "procurement" of Personal Protective Equipment from China, "Twiggy" Forrest joined the WA Minister for Health Roger Cook at a press conference. Mr Forrest's special guest was China's Consul-General in WA, Madam Dong.

The fact that a representative of the Chinese government was not only present but spoke at a WA government press conference barely caused a ripple.

Instead, Mr Forrest was lauded by the WA Health Minister for his intervention in securing the PPE in a competitive environment, with the agreement that he would be reimbursed by the taxpayer.

The exercise earned him a glowing front page the following day. A week later, Mr Forrest had the temerity to tell local radio "There's been a bit of banter saying, you know, oh there's these business people, these bad, bad business people sending precious masks and PPE to China in January and February. Well mate, I'm guilty as charged. I did that too. That was when they were in the middle of their worst crisis. Now, I sent hundreds of thousands of products over there," he crowed.

Mr Forrest's argument was that the favour was repaid many times over. "These guys are just heroic" he gushed.

They're also part of an autocratic regime that oppresses, "re-educates", blackmails and kills dissenters. Beijing attempted to silence doctors including the late Li Wenliang, who was censored when he tried to warn about the dangers of the frightening new virus in Wuhan in December.

But Mr Forrest is not alone when it comes to extolling the virtues of the communist regime.

Author of Silent Invasion: China's Influence In Australia, Professor Clive Hamilton refers to WA's network of business people and political leaders as Perth's "China Club". And with good reason. He told journalist Nathan Hondros that: "Western Australia seemed to be particularly prone to political influence through the business community and through political leaders who've been cultivated over many years." The rich and powerful in WA have ensured that the soft power of Beijing enjoys the warm embrace of media allies and government in the state.

Opinion editorials praising China are par for the course. Madam Dong has written at least two.

Criticism of the regime is, at best, muted.

On Thursday, right on cue, the West Australian's front page ran a photograph of Seven West Media's Chairman Kerry Stokes under the headline DOLLARS AND SENSE.

Splashed over three pages, the billionaire called for the Commonwealth to appease China, warning that, "Australia's prosperity was in jeopardy if Beijing's anger was left unchecked". The paper stated: "Mr Stokes said it was not sensible for Australia to 'poke our biggest provider of income in the eye'." Beijing's anger? How about the rest of us? Globally, COVID-19 has claimed the lives of more than 230,000 people, and while the loss of life in Australia has been limited to 93 poor souls, the hit to our economy and way of life has been disastrous.

Wages have been slashed, and hundreds of thousands have lost their jobs. More than one million people are on JobSeeker or the dole, and 540,000 employers have applied for the JobKeeper subsidy covering an estimated 3.3 million workers.

The effect of the pandemic emanating from China is devastating. The Prime Minister is right to want an independent inquiry into the origins of the virus.

But Mr Forrest and Mr Stokes argue that any investigation should be delayed and take place after the US election in November.

If tracing its genesis can help guard against future pandemics, surely expediency is warranted.

The fallout from Wednesday's press conference, including The West's front page, should raise serious questions about the dissemination of news and the wielding of influence in Western Australia's constrained media.Jane Marwick is a broadcaster and commentator.