Exclusive: Freddy's boys on same flight as ref and other match officials DON'T kick the seat Freddy, referee Gerard Sutton is in front of you. In a decision that will spark conspiracy theories from Queensland, the entire NSW Blues squad will fly to Adelaide on the same plane as all nine match officials in charge of State of Origin I on Wednesday night.

'Operation Adelaide' for the Blues has taken an unprecedented turn with game one referee Sutton and video review official Steve Chiddy booked to share the same charter flight as Brad 'Freddy' Fittler's Blues.

Win, lose or draw for NSW, Sutton - who also officiated the NRL grand final last Sunday - and his team are also booked to fly back to Sydney with the Blues only hours after the historic series-opener in Adelaide.

Sutton's seat on the same flight as the NSW players, coaching staff and support team prompts immediate thoughts of what in-flight discussions may unfold if a major refereeing decision goes against Fittler's team.

Unlike other fired-up coaches who have confronted match officials after major games in the past, Fittler's laid-back nature gives NRL and NSWRL officials every confidence the coach will refrain from moving through the cabin to vent frustration over a reffing decision.

"Knowing Freddy, I wouldn't be surprised if he offered Gerard the exit aisle so he's comfortable with the extra leg room," NSWRL CEO David Trodden said.

"In all seriousness though, I know that Freddy and the entire team will show nothing but respect for the match officials, realising these unique travel arrangements are just part of the world we're living in right now." Due to the travel-bubble that both the NSW and Queensland Origin squads must adhere to, private charter flights have been booked for Wednesday night's clash with both teams set to fly in-and-out of Adelaide within 13 hours.

The COVID-19 pandemic forced the NRL to introduce charter flights for every team during last season - and on some occasions match referees have also shared the same flights.

But this will be the first time that a State of Origin team has travelled with match officials, including touch judges and standby officials.

"It's not foreign for a few of the Sydney clubs who did it this year, but for an Origin match this will be different, that's for sure," Blues team manager Peter Parr said.

The Blues hit-and-run mission to claim a valuable first-up win in Adelaide will begin with their charter flight set to depart Bankstown Airport around 10.30am on Wednesday.

They will then check-in to the Mantra Hotel in Adelaide where they can have lunch, rest and complete their preparation with a team meeting prior to boarding a bus for Adelaide Oval.

By the time they leave the ground following full-time, travel back to the airport for their return flight to Sydney and walk back into the Pullman Hotel at Sydney Olympic Park it will be 3.30am Thursday.

Interestingly, Fittler has decided to include every member of his 27-man squad on the flight to Adelaide for the series-opener. A further 21 staff, including coaching, high-performance and medical teams will also be on the flight.

Additionally, the Blues will travel with a security guard and their assigned COVID-19 officer, Mark O'Meley.

Every player and staff member will undergo a coronavirus test 48 hours before kick-off. Any player showing signs of infection will be withdrawn from the match.

OPERATION ADELAIDE ITINERARY Wednesday 10.30am - Charter flight from Bankstown Airport to Adelaide 1.30pm - Lunch & pre-game rest at Adelaide Mantra Hotel 4.30pm - Team meeting at hotel 5.30pm - Bus to Adelaide Oval 7.45pm - Kick-off Origin I 11pm - Depart Adelaide Oval Midnight - Flight from Adelaide to Bankstown Airport 3.30am - Into bed at Pullman Hotel, Sydney Olympic Park