VIRUS INQUIRY POWERFUL global leaders including the UK, Russia, India and Japan are among a coalition of 62 nations supporting Australia's call for an independent inquiry into the coronavirus ahead of a vote at the World Health Assembly.

The demand for an "impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation" of the international health response to COVID-19 is expected to be the most controversial motion in a draft resolution written by the European Union, due to be put to the Assembly tomorrow morning AEST.

It tasks World Health Organisation director general Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus with launching the evaluation "at the earliest appropriate moment" to review the "lessons learned" from the deadly pandemic.

Senior Federal government sources said they do not expect China to oppose the inquiry.

One source said while it will not be known for sure until the motion is called tomorrow, it is believed Beijing will have little option but to support the inquiry given the overwhelming global support for it.

Australia was an early supporter of the draft resolution, which, in addition to having the support of the EU's 27 member states, also has the backing of 35 other countries.

The inquiry motion does not mention the origins of the coronavirus, but does call on the "actions of WHO and their timelines pertaining to the COVID-19 pandemic" to be among the issues examined.

It also does not set out a specific method for an inquiry, suggesting using "existing mechanisms" for review as an option.

The review would then make recommendations to "improve global pandemic prevention, preparedness, and response capacity".

Foreign Affairs Minister Marise Payne said there was "positive support" for an independent review into the pandemic to help the world "learn the lessons necessary to protect global health".

"This is about collaborating to equip the international community to better prevent or counter the next pandemic and keep our citizens safe," Ms Payne said. "Australia and a significant number of countries are co-sponsoring the EU-led resolution, which includes a call for an impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation, to be presented at this week's World Health Assembly meeting." The resolution also calls for global co-operation and collaboration to step up at "all levels" to "contain, control and mitigate the COVID-19 pandemic". It specifically highlights a need to provide people with "reliable and comprehensive information" about the coronavirus and measures being taken by authorities in response to the pandemic.

With conspiracy theories and fake miracle cures for COVID-19 increasingly spreading online, the resolution asks countries to counter "malicious cyber activities" peddling this misinformation.

The EU motion recognises the critical role of "extensive immunisation" against COVID-19 as a "global public good for health" once a safe, effective and affordable vaccine is available.

The draft resolution is being proposed by a host of nations, including some of the most powerful, such as Russia and the UK, as well as Australia, Japan and South Korea.

WHO'S ON BOARD Albania, Australia, Bangladesh, Belarus, Bhutan, Botswana, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, El Salvador, Guatemala, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Japan, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Mozambique, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Paraguay, Peru, South Korea, Moldova, Russian Federation, San Marino, Sierra Leone, South Africa.