UN, China cop blame CHINA failed to contain the coronavirus "more forcefully" a year ago and the United -Nations-run World Health Organisation was too slow to declare a global emergency, -independent investigators say.

A panel of experts has -released a scathing interim -report on the response to the COVID-19 pandemic, criticising the WHO for taking until January 30 last year to declare the situation an "emergency".

The panel was formed last year after Australia and other countries called for an independent process to review the global response to the pandemic, and is led by former New Zealand prime minister Helen Clark and former Liberian president Ellen Johnson Sirleaf.

The report argued the "evidence of deficiencies in pandemic preparedness and response" called for "far-reaching change for the -future".

It confirmed "evidence from Wuhan" dating back to late December 2019 suggested that "a novel virus may be -responsible for the clinically observed cases of pneumonia of unknown origin".

However, Chinese authorities did not alert the world to this possibility at the time.

"A close reading of the chronology of the earliest events in the emergence of COVID-19 also suggests to the panel that there were lost -opportunities to apply basic public health measures (early)," the report said.

"What is clear to the panel is that public health measures could have been applied more forcefully by local and national health authorities in China in January." The panel also questioned why the WHO did not refer to the coronavirus as a "pandemic" until 11 March, and called for a major overhaul of the organisation's global alert system.

"Critical elements of the system are slow, cumbersome and indecisive," the report said.

The panel has recommended a system of "real-time" data gathering fed by local clinics and laboratories be created within "days, not weeks".

"This technical updating must be accompanied by a political step-change in the willingness of countries to hold themselves accountable for taking all necessary actions as soon as an alert is issued." The panel said the WHO had been "underpowered".

"The incentives for co-operation are too weak to ensure the effective engagement of (countries) with the inter-national system in a disciplined, transparent, account-able and timely manner," the report said.

Australia's Chief Medical Officer Professor Paul Kelly said he understood why there would be criticism of China's early actions in the pandemic, but their successful containment of the virus in Wuhan showed there was "a lot we can learn from the Chinese -response". "They had a terrible situation there, which they have been able to come through," he said.