MINE THREAT TO PILLARS OF HORSE INDUSTRY I am writing in support of Coolmore Australia and Godolphin regarding your article on the battle to stop a mine development on their doorstep (Turf war goes underground as stud faces mine, 20/11).

I am dismayed to learn that mining groups continue to relentlessly pursue the land which forms the cornerstone of Australia's thoroughbred racing and breeding industry.

The amount of time, energy and money that has gone into constantly fighting the mines' failed attempts to establish large operations in the heart of horse breeding country is ridiculous.

The newly-proposed Maxwell mine's proximity to two of Australia's most prestigious horse studs, Coolmore Australia and Godolphin, threatens to not only profoundly impact the thoroughbred industry but also the water supply and the health of the animals and people that live there.

I grew up on Coolmore Australia and witnessed first hand the love that is put into cultivating this stunning property and their world-class care of horses.

I am not against mining and I understand that it is an important industry in the Upper Hunter.

But, the fact remains that the proximity of this mine to these pillars of the Australian thoroughbred industry is unacceptable.

I urge the ministers and state government to not allow a new attack on these properties.

Kristen Grimley, Coogee

Army top brass needs to come under fire too The allegations of atrocities in Afghanistan by soldiers is alarming but conclusions should not be drawn until a full and fair investigation is conducted.

After a 40-year association with the army I find it difficult, or perhaps impossible, to believe that knowledge or at least strong rumour of these allegations had not reached top echelons of the military some time ago (Rank behaviour: How did ADF top brass fail to acknowledge grim realities on ground for troops, 20/11).

If it is to be, let not the axe fall on only the lower ranks. Brian Whybrow, Wanniassa, ACT

War crimes a national tragedy It is a profound psychological shock to the nation that innocent citizens and children have been murdered by a 'warrior' coterie of special forces (Dagger to the heart, 20/11).

Our long-prized ethic of fair go and decency has been violated. So has our proud history of complying with humane protocols about the treatment of others in war.

Deploring the likes of al-Qaeda now will sound hollow. Descending to such abysmal levels ourselves might have terrible future consequences for our own captured servicemen and women.

Also, occasions like Anzac Day and Remembrance Day might be infected by these shocking events by distracting from honourable thoughts of commemoration and heroism.

What a national tragedy.

Ron Sinclair, Bathurst

Brave history not tarnished The allegations against Australian special forces are frightening and disappointing to say the least (Dagger to the heart, 20/11).

The history of Australian forces in combat is impeccable and should be remembered when the current allegations are investigated.

Any negative findings should not reflect in any way on men and women who have served this country in the past or are current enlisted (and innocent) personnel.

It is alleged 19 soldiers killed 39 civilians or prisoners outside the guidelines of the Geneva Convention.

These alleged occurrences should be investigated thoroughly to establish if there is any wrongdoing and each allegation should be investigated on it's merits.

Hopefully, the investigation will not be long and drawn out in order that we can move forward.

Brian Tovey, Hammondville NSW

Speed limit signs are enough I don't understand all the fuss about the removal of what are called warning signs alerting motorists to speed camera locations (No warning signs for speeders, 19/11).

There are always warning signs - they consist of a set of large black numbers inside a big red circle on a large white background posted at the roadside.

That sign should be all that is needed to warn people to stay below a certain speed.

Doug Richards, Tamarama

Taming our schools Principals and teachers are facing record levels of stress and burnout as violence and offensive behaviour continues to rise in NSW schools (School under siege, Saturday 14/11).

A case in point was a vicious bashing of a Year 9 girl at a Western Sydney high school, the latest in a string of at least 12 serious incidents at the school since July this year.

The state government has reacted with an army of nurses to be posted to primary and high schools to treat and refer pupils dealing with mental health issues (Nurse army to the rescue, Sunday 15/11). Let's hope the state government also have further measures in mind to bring about healthy change at our schools.

Peter Penglis, Kambah, ACT

Regional power struggle Right now, Prime Minister Scott Morrison doesn't need a lecture from China's bullying government on the best way for Australia to manage its sovereign interests (True blue values not for trade, 20/11). As the PM rightly states, "Australia's values are not up for trade".

Perhaps the PM should also politely remind President Xi, that Australia doesn't need to keep importing China's cheap solar panels either ... we are happy with our locally-sourced, reliable cheap baseload coal and gas power.

Bob Partington, Wahroonga

Expensive complexities The NSW Treasurer has good intentions in wanting to change the tax regime when buying a house (Dom's call of duty, 18/11).

But the problem really starts earlier than the buying/selling of a house - it's in the building of it.

Council regulations and applications are painstaking and expensive not to mention time delays. Then there's building regulations bound so tightly in red and green tape.

You need a workforce to begin with and trying to make sense of the building and construction award is harder than putting a man on the moon and just as expensive.

You need licences like never before (a licence to have so many licences is about the only one they haven't thought of yet).

You need office staff to report every action you take for the ATO who will then cross check with everyone else who cross checks.

And, to think you haven't even turned a sod yet.

Barry Laurie, Tweed Heads

A message to you, Rudy Fake news or does Giuliani dye his hair dark (Hair dye sweat drips down Giuliani's face in press conference - Online, 20/11)?

At last we are getting down to the important issues in the recent election. Give up dyeing it Rudy, no one cares and soon you will be out of the public view as the election results are finalised.

Dennis Fitzgerald, Box Hill, Victoria

Briefly ...

The emperor Nero fiddled while Rome burnt and US President Donald Trump is playing golf while America is in turmoil and people are passing in high numbers from COVID-19.

Ed Partyka, Coffs Harbour "" " Okay, so Brad Fittler after two successful origins, misses the third. He is still by far the best person to restore our rightful place as greater than Queensland.

Geoff Hinds, Merrylands "" " Cameron Smith had better retire otherwise he'll be playing reserve grade if Harry Grant returns to the Storm next season. What a revelation this young fella is and what a career lies ahead for him.

John McKinnon, Kareela

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001