The Aussie star's dream cast is in place to start shooting her latest TV project, writes Annette Sharp Production on the Nicole Kidman-backed television short series Nine Perfect Strangers gets underway on the NSW North Coast on Monday, bringing hope to an ailing arts industry and more than a dash of Hollywood pizzazz to Byron Bay's sleepy hinterland.

Cameras will start rolling 72 hours after the final piece of the casting puzzle fell into place on Friday, with news earthy New Jersey actor Bobby Cannavale, star of Blue Jasmine and The Irishman, has joined the cast alongside Oscar-nominated US funny woman Melissa McCarthy and co-producer Kidman.

Sources were unable to confirm whether Cannavale's Australian partner Rose Byrne and the couple's young sons, Rocco and Rafa, have also swapped COVID-19 crushed New York for the Northern Rivers for the 19-week shoot.

In recent weeks a rural property on the outskirts of Byron Bay has been transformed into a Californian-style health retreat for the eight-episode Hulu series that reunites Kidman with Australian co-producer Bruna Papandrea and top-selling Sydney novelist Liane Moriarty, upon whose book, Big Little Lies, the women's previous Golden Globe-winning TV series was based.

Nine Perfect Strangers tells the story of nine stressed and worn-out characters that check into boutique health resort Tranquillum hoping to transform themselves.

Among the group is a romance novelist, a lottery winner, a grieving couple whose son has died, a single mother looking to shed weight and a divorce lawyer. Each hopes the unconventional Russian retreat proprietor Masha (Kidman) can reinvigorate them.

The series, directed by Jonathan Levine, has been a passion project for Kidman and Papandrea since they acquired the rights to the novel ahead of its literary release in July 2018.

The series also sees Kidman reunited with acclaimed US TV director David E. Kelley, creator and screenwriter of Big Little Lies.

Kidman and her husband Keith Urban, and daughters Sunday and Faith, returned to Australia three weeks ago and bunkered down at their Southern Highlands property for two weeks of mandatory, police-supervised quarantine.

The series shoot is scheduled to wrap in mid-December, freeing the Kidman-Urbans to spend Christmas in Australia.

THE PLAYERS HEADING INTO THE RETREAT MELISSA MCCARTHY Two-time Oscar nominated American comedic actress best known for Bridesmaids, Ghostbusters and Gilmore Girls.

McCarthy (right) plays Frances Welty, a 50-something twice-divorced romance novelist. She is suffering from physical pain manifested by career and romance issues.

Bruised by criticism - and news her editor won't be publishing her 19th book - she retreats to Tranquillum House following a recommendation from a friend.

BOBBY CANNAVALE Emmy-nominated American actor best known for Blue Jasmine, Boardwalk Empire and Mr Robot.

Cannavale stars as Tony "Smiley" Hogburn, a star football player (originally an AFL legend in Moriarty's book, but readapted for screen) with a face full of tattoos.

Newly divorced, the 56-year-old ex-athlete is depressed about getting older and checks into the retreat to figure out if life is worth living.

REGINA HALL American actress best known for Girls Trip, Support The Girls and Scary Movie. Hall (below, left) stars as Carmel Schneider, a mother-of-four whose husband has left her for a younger woman.

ASHER KEDDIE Logie-winning Australian actress best known for X-Men Origins: Wolverine, Paper Giants: The Birth Of Cleo, Offspring and Love My Way.

Keddie (below, right) is Heather Marconi, wife of Napoleon.

She's angry about her son's death, but, unlike her husband, refuses to move on, choosing instead to live with her grief. Heather believes she is responsible for Zach's death.

MELVIN GREGG American actor and social media entertainer known for The Way Back and High Flying Bird.

Gregg (left) is Ben Chandler, Jessica's Lamborghini-obsessed husband who isn't happy with the way his wife has changed since their lottery win, though he's very happy with his car. Ben wants their pre-lottery marriage back.

SAMARA WEAVING Australian actress and model best known for Home And Away, Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri, Picnic At Hanging Rock.

Weaving (below, middle) plays Jessica Chandler, the 20-something plastic surgery obsessed wife of Ben. The couple are struggling after winning $22 million.

They check in to the spa to save their marriage.

MICHAEL SHANNON American actor best known for Nocturnal Animals, 99 Homes, The Shape Of Water, Loving and Waco. Shannon (right) plays Napoleon Marconi who, with his wife Heather, checks in to the retreat to deal with the grief of losing a son.

He needs to be strong for his wife and daughter and blames himself for Zach's death GRACE VAN PATTEN American actress best known for Under The Silver Lake, The Meyerowitz Stories and The Sopranos.

Van Patten (left) stars as Zoe, Heather and Napoleon's 20-year-old daughter, Zach's twin.

She's angry with her brother for taking his own life - and blames herself for not being able to stop him.

LUKE EVANS (RIGHT) Welsh actor and singer best known for The Hobbit, Beauty And The Beast, The Girl On The Train and Dracula Untold.

Evans is Lars Lee, the handsome divorce lawyer who only represents female clients. Lars appears to have it all: great job, great relationship.

He seems to have it figured out, but a hallucination has him haunted by a choice he made, one that has ruptured him relationship with his gay partner.

NICOLE KIDMAN Australian Oscar-winning actress best known for Big Little Lies, The Hours, Cold Mountain, Lion and Moulin Rouge!

Kidman anchors the production as Maria "Masha" Dmitrichenko - a former high-flying executive who has a come-to-God moment at the peak of her corporate career and reinvents herself as director of boutique health-and-wellness resort Tranquillum.

Masha's unorthodox methods often confound and terrify her clients. Her staff are Yao (Manny Jacinto), a former paramedic who once saved Masha's life, and Delilah (Tiffany Boone), the former PA-turned-wellness consultant who sees precisely what her boss is up to at Tranquillum House.