HOW SEVERAL NRL STARS HAVE REBOUNDED FROM INCIDENTS THEY WOULD RATHER FORGET TO BE ONE GAME AWAY FROM THE GAME'S BIG DANCE.

CODY Walker was in the thick of things a fortnight ago, just where he likes to be, when the sledge was fired.

South Sydney's No.6 was eyeballing, shoving, even pressing his forehead right into that of Newcastle rival Mitchell Pearce before, seemingly, suggesting the pair go further again, ey?

"You'll do it when I'm not looking," Pearcey joked in reply, before going louder again. "You'll do it when I'm not looking." Which you get, right?

The cackling crack, undoubtedly, was a direct reference to Walker's now infamous karate kick which - delivered during a Casino street fight last December - was filmed, extorted badly, sent viral and eventually investigated by NSW Police.

Which earlier this year, you may recall, caused some drama for the Bunnies livewire.

But now? Um, no.

Sure, he may still cop the lighthearted dig occasionally.

But over the past few months, Walker has not simply overcome said drama, but played himself up among the biggest stories - and superstars - of the 2020 NRL season.

Which isn't to dub this weekend "Redemption" Round.

Indeed, there is no more misused phrase in the rugby league vernacular. But undoubtedly, like Walker, there are a handful of players across all four remaining clubs who over the past 12 months have survived, even bounced back from all sorts of dramas to now sit within 80 minutes of an NRL grand final.

As for their respective crimes?

Make what you want of them.

Plenty do.

But certainly, all are on the cusp of going from rugby league's outhouse to penthouse.

CODY WALKER South Sydney Rabbitohs Street fight Walker's run to, and through, the NRL finals has been so strong Andrew Johns likens it to that of Parramatta prodigy Jarryd Hayne in '09.

Which is some claim.

Same deal NSW Origin coach Brad Fittler revealing the Indigenous All Star is now his leading candidate for the Blues' No.6 jersey - in the box seat, ahead of Luke Keary - after being hooked, then punted after a horror debut last year.

Indeed, so outstanding has Walker been over the back half of the year, it's unthinkable to believe that as recently as May he was embroiled in a NSW Police investigation over his involvement in a country NSW street fight.

Walker later revealed he had been mourning the loss of a cousin before the incident occurred.

NATHAN CLEARY Penrith Panthers TikTok controversy Okay, so find me a 20-something bloke anywhere who wouldn't open the door if a bevy of blondes came knockin'?

But after breaking NRL COVID-19 bubble restrictions in April with that TikTok dance, and then lying about it to League HQ, Cleary has since found the best form of his young career.

Despite calls to out the Panthers No.7 for the year, Cleary eventually missed two games, outlayed $30K and then went about leading his team to the NRL minor premiership.

Better, he is now short-priced favourite to secure the Dally M Medal.

NELSON ASOFA-SOLOMONA Melbourne Storm Bar fight Remember the big unit's Bali bar fight last October?

Of course you do.

His moment of viral madness was enough for the Melbourne prop to eventually be fined $15,000 and suspended for three Tests.

Yet in reality?

Somebody should have awarded him a shiny gold belt.

Apart from showing a set of fists as heavy as they were hectic, Asofa-Solomona also ignited said chaos only after teammate Suliasi Vunivalu was king hit.

Regardless, the 115kg Stormer remains a key component of the Melbourne pack.

HUDSON YOUNG Canberra Raiders Eye-gouging Few blokes ever get suspended for eye-gouging. Fewer still, go twice. Yet after a 2019 crime spree more suited to, say, Reg Reagan, the young Raider with rugby league's most unfortunate signature is finally fulfilling his potential.

Against the Roosters last week, Young was outstanding.

And the Raiders backrower has revealed how regular sessions with a sports psychologist are helping him control an aggressive streak that resulted in suspensions totally 13 weeks last year.

Among the Raiders' best against the reigning premiers, Young now looms as a genuine threat against Melbourne on Friday night.

TYRONE MAY Penrith Panthers Sex tapes After sitting out the 2019 season for his involvement in a sex tape scandal, 24-year-old May has this year become a key component of the NRL minor premiers.

Playing off the bench as a utility, May can fill a variety of spots for coach Ivan Cleary, who has remained one of his biggest supporters both during and after the ordeal. May's ability to fill a variety of positions has also freed up Isaah Yeo to play regularly at No.13, where he has starred for the Panthers this year.