KNOWING THE RIGHT BARGAIN BASEMENT PLAYERS IS KEY TO KFC SUPERCOACH NRL SUCCESS. WE TAKE A LOOK AT THE YOUNG TALENT SET TO SHINE IN 2021.

ZAC SADDLER (Sea Eagles) FRF, 2RF - Rookie A 201cm forward almost quit the game after an unhappy stint with the Bulldogs, but Des Hasler and Noel Cleal talked him into joining the Sea Eagles. In his one game for the Blacktown Workers in 2020 Saddler ran for 105m, and made 15 tackles, two tackle breaks and an offload in 33 minutes at prop. More enticing was his performance for the Indigenous All-Stars where Saddler played 60 minutes, mostly on an edge, running for 83m, with 34 tackles (none missed), two offloads and two tackle busts. The Sea Eagles have a good stock of middle forwards, but not much in the way of edges with Jack Gosiewski and new recruit Andrew Davey seemingly competing to fill the shoes of Joel Thompson. He looks a quality cheapie.

JAYDEN SULLIVAN (Dragons) HFB - Games: 1, PPG: 58, MPG: 80 The diminutive half made an impression in his NRL debut against Melbourne in round 20 last season with 26 tackles (no misses), a try assist, a last touch, a forced dropout and eight runs. A local junior, Sullivan led the 2019 SG Ball team to victory, played five games Jersey Flegg that year and was a key part of the South Coast Black Cockatoos team that won the 2019 Koori Knockout competition. High-priced halves Ben Hunt and Corey Norman are ahead of him, but Hunt has spent time at hooker and Norman was far from impressive at times in 2020.

CHARLIE STAINES (Panthers) CTW, FLB - Games: 2, PPG: 112, MPG: 54 In 107 minutes of NRL action 'The Forbes Ferrari' scored six tries, including four on debut, before a hamstring injury ended his season. Penrith have already flagged that he will be given first crack at the starting left wing spot at the expense of Josh Mansour, who has been told he can leave the club. Staines will get a steep discount on his 2020 average but will need one to fit into the cheapie category, otherwise he may need to be moved to the mid-range bible.

CHRISTIAN TUIPULOTU (Sea Eagles) CTW - Games: 1, PPG: 67, MPG: 80 In his only NRL start for the Roosters, Tuipulotu scored 67 points with 23 runs, four tackle busts, a linebreak and a try - all against the Melbourne Storm. That's tremendous workrate for SuperCoaches and for Manly, who have snapped him up. Tuipulotu also played one game in the NSW Cup in 2020 and in that game he had 22 runs for 157m. Expect him to put serious pressure on incumbent winger Jorge Taufua.

BEN CONDON (Cowboys) 2RF - Games: 1, PPG: 14, MPG: 17 Made his NRL debut in round 19 last season, making 10 tackles and four runs in 17 minutes. A Queensland under-20 Origin representative, Condon has the frame to play middle - he's 196cm and 110kg - and the mobility to play on an edge. The Cowboys have a good crop of forwards, but they did lose Gavin Cooper and John Asiata in the off-season so there's minutes to be earned.

PAUL TURNER (Warriors) HFB - Games: 1, PPG: 48, MPG: 80 A fast-stepping star of the future, Turner crossed the line twice on debut only to be denied by the video referee each time. His agility is a nightmare for defenders with Turner busting eight tackles in his debut game from just seven runs. Warriors scout Peter O'Sullivan expects Turner to play plenty more games in 2021. "He can do things in the game that nobody else in our club can do," O'Sullivan said. "He is our go-to if Kodi Nikorima gets injured but we'd also like to take a look at him in the centres at some stage as well."

TOM ALE (Warriors) FRF - Games: 1, PPG: 18, MPG: 12 Made his NRL debut in round 19 against Canberra as a development player but has been upgraded into the top 30 for 2021. The junior Kiwi rugby prodigy was even part of the Chiefs' under-18s side. Likened to Jason Taumalolo for his hard running and tackle-breaking, Ale must improve his fitness to increase his chances of becoming a regular first-grader. "He has lovely feet and legs at the line," O'Sullivan said. "He has an offload in his game and can beat people." The departure of Adam Blair, Lachlan Burr and Agnatius Paasi creates opportunity in the middle, although Ben Murdoch-Masila, Addin Fonua-Blake and Kane Evans arrived in the off-season.

JOSH SCHUSTER Sea Eagles) 5/8 - Games: 1, PPG: 31, MPG: 65 With hooker Danny Levi gone there is a spine spot up for grabs, and Schuster play five-eighth if Kieran Foran moves to dummy-half. Schuster looked very impressive in his debut last year (which Benji Marshall called the "the best I've seen in my time ever") before going down injured. But in 65 minutes he still scored 31 points, including 19 points in base, a forced dropout, two offloads and a try contribution. He is competing with Foran, Lachlan Croker and Cade Cust for a place but, if he keeps a starting spot, he would be a near must cheapie for KFC SuperCoaches.

MAX FEAGAI (Dragons) CTW - Games: 2, PPG: 20, MPG: 51 The first of the Feagai twins to play first grade, Max appeared in the Dragons' final two matches of 2020 with a round 19 bench cameo and 80 minutes on the wing in round 20. Euan Aitken's departure frees up a starting left centre spot. Brayden Wiliame may have his nose in front in the race to nab that spot but Feagai is sure to be in new coach Anthony Griffin's thoughts come selection time and I expect to see more of him in 2021.

SAM WALKER (Roosters) HFB - Rookie Still only 18, Walker is seen as the Roosters' long-term halfback, given Kyle Flanagan's departure. "I think the rule changes will suit him. He's got good acceleration, that bit of footwork, the passing game on both sides. Once he gets confident with organising the side, which comes with experience and exposure to that higher level," said Tony Adam, who coached Walker in the Australian Schoolboys in 2019. Walker's not a walk-up start, though, with Lachlan Lam, Drew Hutchison and former Warrior Adam Keighran competing for spots.

FRANKLIN PELE (Sharks) FRF - Rookie At 190cm and a rather spectacular 132kg, the 2018 Australian Schoolboys representative has earned big raps from coach Josh Morris. "Frankie did a whole pre-season with us this year, performed well in our two NRL trials, scored a try in one of them," said Morris. "He is a big powerful player who runs hard and seems to be getting bigger by the year." With Aaron Woods, Andrew Fifita, Braden Hamlin-Uele, Toby Rudolf and Aiden Tolman demanding minutes, Pele may have to wait a little longer to debut.

STEFANO UTOIKAMANU (Wests Tigers) FRF - Games: 3, PPG: 14, MPG: 8 Limited game time after debuting with Parramatta in 2020, you can't fault his PPM of 1.79. In NSW Cup he averaged almost 100m per game (35 of them post-contact) with a couple of tackle busts and 25 tackles. The ability is immense and why Michael Maguire personally recruited him. Starting prop Josh Aloiai has left but Utoikamanu is still competing with James Tamou, Joe Ofahengaue, Alex Twal, Thomas Mikaele, Zane Musgrove and Russell Packer for minutes in the middle.

JAKE SIMPKIN (Wests Tigers) HOK - Rookie Jacob Liddle may have an edge in experience and get first crack at the No.9 jersey, but Simpkin appears the more exciting prospect. He impressed in Queensland's under-18 Origin in 2019 (41 tackles, 86 running metres and a try) before COVID-19 restricted him to just one game of NSW Cup (45 minutes with 26 tackles made, 32 running metres and a try assist). There's a strong chance that we see both Liddle and Simpkin in round one. It will be tempting to grab Simpkin at bottom dollar as he has the type of attacking game that can see him score well in restricted minutes.

JOCK MADDEN (Wests Tigers) HFB - Rookie The former Australian Schoolboys star has been elevated into the top squad as Luke Brook's understudy. A traditional No.7, Madden is not expected to play five-eighth with Adam Doueihi the leading contender to partner Brooks. A prodigious kicker, Madden is also good with the ball in hand averaging just over 65 run metres per game playing NSW Cup in 2019/20.

GREG MARZHEW (formerly Leleisiuao) (Titans) CTW- Rookie Has the potential to be a SuperCoach stud, if he can get on the field. He's been a potential cheapie star for three years now, when he set alight the Parramatta under-20s. Marzhew was superb in the 2020 Nines for the Titans, and ran for 150m+ metres and made an incredible 14 tackle busts in the opening game of the 2020 QCup. And yet, no NRL debut. Maybe this will be the year for Marzhew.

BEN TRBOJEVIC (Sea Eagles) CTW, 2RF- Rookie Des Hasler was cagey when asked about the third Trbojevic, who is now in Manly's top 30. At 193cm and 105kg, he can play in the centres or in the back row. But, given their backline depth, the 19-year-old is more likely to be use at centre, or off the bench, in 2021.

LINDSAY SMITH (Panthers) FRF - Rookie The loss of James Tamou and Jack Hetherington creates space in the middle and SuperCoaches will be hoping this local junior can capitalise on that opportunity. An Australian Schoolboy in 2017 and Jersey Flegg star in 2019, Smith was impressive in the only NSW Cup game of 2020, playing 53 minutes at prop, running for 146 metres, making 33 tackles, two tackle busts and an offload. Middle forward Matt Eisenhuth's addition makes it harder but Zane Tetevano has attracted the Super League interest, leaving James Fisher-Harris, Moses Leota and Spencer Leniu vying for places.

JIRAH MOMOISEA (Knights) 2RF - Rookie Elevated to the top-30 squad early in 2020, the former prop turned second-row prospect will be pushing to make his NRL debut. Momoisea was impressive in the one game of NSW Cup in 2020, playing 80 minutes on an edge making 41 tackles, running for 149 metres and throwing an offload. The Knights are blessed with two 80-minute second rowers in Lachlan Fitzgibbon and Tyson Frizell, but should injury strike then Momoisea is ready to step in.

KYLE PATERSON (Sharks) HOK - Rookie A former Queensland under-19s representative, Paterson joined Cronulla from Canberra last year. The talented rake played a crucial role in Canberra making the 2019 Jersey Flegg grand final, registering 13 tries and 17 try assists in 21 matches. Quick off the mark and sharp around the ruck, Patterson will operate as a back-up for Blayke Brailey.

MATT MOYLAN (Sharks) FLB, 5/8 - Games: 8, PPG: 29, MPG: 68 Just 11 games in two years, he is a risk. But the Sharks will be without chief playmaker Shaun Johnson (Achilles injury) for the opening 8-10 rounds, meaning there is opportunity for reward. If Moylan can find his 2016-2018 form then you're getting a player capable of averaging double his asking price and that's some reward.

THE RAIDERS CONTENDERS With Nick Cotric gone, Curtis Scott's mixed form and Jarrod Croker set to miss the start of the season through injury there are backline spots up for grabs at the Raiders. Here are the contenders:

MATT TIMOKO (Raiders) CTW - Games: 2, PPG: 28, MPG: 57 The young Kiwi played two first-grade games in 2020, debuting off the bench in round 16 and then playing the full game at centre in round 20. In that final game, Timoko made 10 runs and 15 tackles (34 base points) along with four tackle busts and an offload for 41 points all up. Either Timoko or Harley Smith-Shields will replace Croker.

HARLEY SMITH-SHIELDS (Raiders) CTW - Games: 2, PPG: 33, MPG: 55 Debuted off the bench in round 11 and start at centre in round 20, scoring a try (with linebreak) and finishing with 55 SuperCoach points. Based on 2019 stats, Timoko gets through slightly more work in defence, HSS more work with the ball. Their SuperCoach value will be largely determined by how Croker's recovery progresses.

BAILEY SIMONSSON (Raiders) CTW, FLB - Games: 7, PPG: 23, MPG: 59 Has been a preseason standout after a shoulder injury ended his 2020 season. In the four 80-minute games Simonsson played he averaged 35.5PPG which accords with the 38PPG he averaged across 18 games in 2019. Cotric's likely replacement he will be a tempting buy priced around plenty of competition.

KFC SUPERCOACH NRL 2021 PRICES REVEALED dailytelegraph.com.au