PETER V'landys is confident the NRL Premiership will not be derailed by a COVID-19 resurgence but the game has contingency plans in place to -ensure the show can go on.

ARLC chairman V'landys and the NRL are closely monitoring the coronavirus situation in NSW as Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk threatens to declare more Sydney hot spots and close the state's border again.

The NRL has already returned to stricter biosecurity protocols following a spike in NSW cases and the second surge in Victoria has put the league on high alert.

Palaszczuk has already declared a number of regions in Sydney as COVID hot spots and blocked people from those areas from entering Queensland.

Players from the hot spots are required to undergo extra testing before entering Queensland and NRL teams that travel to Sydney will be closely monitored upon returning home.

The Melbourne Storm, now based on the Sunshine Coast, are facing six straight weeks of quarantine at their hotel base following games in Sydney.

The NRL's 'Project Apollo' -committee has canvassed a number of worst-case scenario options which -include shifting all teams to NSW or Queensland if the virus spreads -further.

Only seven new positive cases were recorded in NSW on Friday and V'landys said he was confident the NRL could continue through a -potential outbreak.

"We have got to stay a step ahead of the virus at all times," he said. "We're trying to stay balanced and a step ahead. If we get through this, that will be why.

"As it stands today, I'm very confident (of the season continuing). But as I said back in March, things can change in 24 hours.

"It's one of those things that is unpredictable. Nothing surprises me." The NRL is currently in Round 11 of a 20-round season which will be followed by four weeks of finals and then a three-game State of Origin series.

The Apollo committee meets weekly to discuss a range of issues the game is facing and creating contingency plans has been part of that.

V'landys praised the NSW and Queensland governments and said he hoped to relax protocols for NRL players in the coming weeks if the situation remained stable.

"That was precautionary because we didn't know how bad the Victorian situation was, there was too much uncertainty because of how many Victorians came over the border," he said.

"Until that uncertainty is eradicated we had to go back to our protocols. "We want minimal risk. We're going to be disciplined. That's why we introduced the protocols again.

"In the next two weeks we might be able to relax the protocols again after we review it. The next two weeks will determine if NSW has basically -eradicated the virus again. We 99 per cent eradicated it (in NSW) and then the Victorian ones came in and infected us again. Now we've got to eradicate it again.

"The way the NSW government is performing at the moment has been eradicating it because they've been able to trace every case. Queensland has been great, they are not overreacting which is a good thing. "With this virus anything can happen and it's a day-to-day proposition. At the moment if it stays like this I'm confident we will see the season out under the current conditions."