… but Rabs not welcome among 50,000 rabid Queenslanders

QUEENSLAND will open Suncorp Stadium to 50,000 ranting banana-benders next Wednesday night - but will refuse entry to rugby league's undeniable voice, Ray Warren.

In the greatest rort since Queensland claimed Kempsey boy Greg -Inglis as its own, Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk has given her Maroons the ultimate State of Origin advantage by declaring stadiums across Brisbane will be free to host at 100 per cent capacity from Tuesday night - exactly 24 hours before Origin III kick-off - yet the border remains closed to Sydney's fans.

Honestly, if only her backline boasted the same sense of timing. Blues coach Brad Fittler dismissed the move. "It doesn't faze us," Fittler said. "We won't be intimidated and we won't be changing our preparations. We know we have all of NSW behind us." While the NSW Blues will now be up against a likely full house at Suncorp Stadium, the Queenslanders are still refusing to allow Warren in for the game - a move that could mean the legendary Channel 9 commentator has called his last Origin.

Unsurprising from a state that routinely celebrates the punching of rugby league's nicest bloke Mick Cronin, Queensland Chief Health Officer Jeannette Young has insisted Warren, Phil Gould, even eighth -Immortal Andrew Johns will have to undertake the mandatory 14-day hotel quarantine program.

This, even after Nine management offered to charter a private jet for the group. "They're welcome to come but they will have to quarantine for 14 days," said Young, effectively giving all of NSW the bird. "If they're not part of (the NRL bubble), they have to apply for an exemption to be allowed into the state. And then they would have to hotel quarantine.

"I would (grant an exemption) to allow them to come into the state, and I frequently have, but they would have to quarantine in a hotel for 14 days." Palaszczuk, meanwhile, was equally excited late on Friday afternoon, saying: "Here is a good one all Queenslanders will be happy about.

"The increase in seated capacity from 75 to 100 per cent," the premier continued, referencing open-air stadiums. "This means the Cauldron can be filled to 100 per cent -capacity for State of Origin next Wednesday night … If you don't have a ticket yet, hopefully more tickets can be -released. Let's fill that -Cauldron and cheer our mighty Maroons." Which is some backflip from a government which, earlier this year, didn't want State of Origin being played at all. A decision Fittler branded -"ridiculous".

Remember that?

The same Premier who wanted the NRL season scrapped. Or at least the three Queensland teams kept from travelling south to compete. Which on reflection, may not have been such a big deal. -Indeed, who would have noticed?

Regardless, back in April Palaszczuk sensationally ruled Brisbane out as an Origin host during the COVID-19 pandemic. A situation that, last we checked, continues.

Which is why that Queensland border remains shut to those from greater Sydney. "I love the footy as much as everyone else," the Premier said in April. "I think it's devastating we're not going to see State of Origin this year. We always have a State of Origin, but how can you have it?" Yet with the Maroons suddenly capable of an upset win … well, now the Queensland government wants to let everyone in. Except Rabs, of course. Same deal Gus and Joey Johns, with Sydneysiders generally also banned.

All of which leaves the Blues to run out on Wednesday night with -nothing but Origin favouritism.

That, and whatever Freddy has cooked up this week. Perfect.