Let's Cook up interest in history It shouldn't come as a surprise that young people get Captain James Cook mixed up with Captain Arthur Phillip, thinking he was part of the First Fleet (Lasting impact of a brief encounter, 29/4).

Even a former National Party deputy leader Bridget McKenzie once stated while in support of Australia Day remaining as a holiday on January 26 that it was the day Cook landed in Australia.

If senior political leaders don't know this important aspect of our history we have a problem, whereby we are possibly not concentrating enough on Australian history.

As someone from a Greek background, Kurnell, the landing place of Captain Cook was the location where many Greek immigrant families during the 1960s and 70s spent Australia Day having picnics and acknowledging the importance of Cook.

Con Vaitsas, Ashbury

"" " Congratulations to The Daily Telegraph for its coverage of the James Cook anniversary (Lasting impact of a brief encounter, 29/4).

We can learn a lot from history. Remember, we can't change it. Let's not forget that being the first European to sight the east coast of Australia was like us now going into space.

Cook's ship the Endeavour was damaged on the Great Barrier Reef and if it had not made it back to England, Australia would have a completely different history.

In 1970, with no COVID-19 hysteria, the Cook anniversary was a big deal. Joe Kovac, Prestons

Doco gives left leaners plenty Moore to digest After reading Miranda Devine's opinion article (For the Greenies, less is Michael Moore, 29/4), I took time out in isolation to look at Planet Of The Humans on YouTube. It was the best 100 minutes I have spent in a long time.

I would urge all Australians to look at this film, especially those Australians and politicians who are suggesting our nation should adopt a 100 per cent renewable energy scheme.

It exposes this green con and the billionaires who will derive financial gains if green energy is adopted.

For the first time the left-wing has shown some transparency on this subject. If Mike Moore was a Pom he would be knighted.

Bruce Rollo, Wollongbar

Powering up electric cars The criticism of the electric car industry in Michael Moore's new documentary is quite surprising (For the Greenies, less is Michael Moore - Miranda Devine, 29/4).

Sure, battery-powered cars are only as clean as the source of electricity they use.

Of course, if they were introduced 20 years ago, their effective carbon emissions would have been indistinguishable from internal-combustion engine cars.

However, with the fast improvement in solar and wind-energy technology, 20 years from now electric cars will realistically allow for widespread, cheap, low-emission private transport.

This is not to mention the fact that electric vehicles will make Australia independent from the need for oil importation. The technology seems like something worth working on.

Simone Belli, Wollstonecraft

Water we waiting for?

It was great to see a list of the projects to get the NSW economy back on track (On a fast track to rebuilding our state, 29/4).

But I failed to see one particular item - there was no mention of dams or water harvesting.

Maybe that's because water is a country issue and not a Sydney one - and not a worry now until the next drought.

Colin Bailey, Heathcote

Wisdom of kid with a smile We seem to all be bemoaning the fact we have to stay in our homes and we can't go to the beach or we are holed up in four star hotels while we come to grips with defeating this pandemic.

Then in contrast to all this doom and gloom, we turn to Page 15 of The Daily Telegraph on Monday and this little chap leaps off the page and into our hearts, more concerned about his mum than the pain and suffering he has endured (Smile that's star quality, 29/4).

We all should learn from six-year-old cancer survivor Chase Green and stop the finger pointing and blame game.

As country legend Tom T Hall says in that great song, "God bless little children while they're still too young to hate".

Don Rodgers, Warragai Creek

Future needs funding now We have $162 billion in the nation's Future Fund. The object of this fund is to strengthen the nation's long-term financial position. This is taxpayers' money stored up for some mythical future. Indeed, it is a worthy cause but the future has arrived with a bang and it is grim.

There is no better time to invest this money in infrastructure projects that will employ people and benefit the nation for decades to come.

Ray Armstrong, Tweed Heads South

Evacuate fatal facility Australian hearts must surely be going out to relatives of the 11 elderly residents of the Newmarch House nursing home near Penrith, who have died from the coronavirus pandemic sweeping much of the world.

Surely this establishment, which has seemingly become a death trap, should be evacuated ASAP before more families get the bad news that one of their cherished relatives has succumbed to the coronavirus.

Eric Palm, Gympie, Qld

Letting down the side The NRL's failure to adequately punish their errant players has let down the general public, the returned soldiers who couldn't march on Anzac Day, those elderly citizens who can't see their families, those who cannot give a loved one a proper funeral, those 18 and 21-year-olds who cannot have a proper birthday party celebration and the medical staff who take care of everyone (Big fines for guns & posers, 29/4).

Finally, they have let down the people who support and love the game of rugby league who have seen that support being trivialised by certain players who couldn't care less about their fellow citizens.

Peter Wilcox, Blayney

Dealing with a global brat I fully agree with your editorial piece (China turns off the charm, 29/4). The Chinese regime seems to be behaving like a spoiled brat caught with his hand in the coronavirus cookie jar.

The threat from the Chinese ambassador to boycott trade with Australia over the proposed independent inquiry into the origins of the coronavirus crisis strongly suggests China has something serious to hide.

China appears to have adopted the same almost paranoiac attitude that it shows when human rights officials seek to investigate the treatment of Tibetans, whose country was taken over forcefully, or the Uighur people, who have been rounded up and confined to "re-education" camps.

President Xi must be convinced by the West that the path he is taking will lead only to great harm on both sides of the battle.

Douglas Mackenzie, Deakin, ACT

Briefly … Miranda Devine and James Morrow have hit the nail on the head (opinion columns, 29/4). The Chinese Communist Party (CPP) have demonstrated they are simply nasty bullies. It's time for Australia to take back those parts of our country we have stupidly allowed to be sold off or long-term leased to disguised entities which are simply fronts for the CPP.

Peter Cattlin, Freshwater "" " The Roosters copped a fair bit of flak for letting go of Latrell Mitchell but it has become obvious they were well ahead of the critics. Good luck to the Rabbits.

Mick Evans, Park Ridge, Qld "" " After talking tough, the NRL has let Latrell Mitchell and Josh Addo-Carr off with a fine of a fraction of their earnings. They should have been banned for the rest of the year.

Brian Whybrow, Wanniassa, ACT

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily TelegraphGPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001