Medallist could be Origin key That 22-year-old Melbourne Storm fullback and this year's Clive Churchill medallist Ryan Papenhuyzen has been included in the NSWBlues squad to take on the Queensland Maroons in the first State of Origin match to be played at the Adelaide Oval on November 4 could prove to be a masterstroke by Blues coach Brad Fittler (Slight stature but immense impact as Paps hits next level, 26/10).

Papenhuyzen has been a revelation this season, and is undoubtedly one of the contributing factors in the Melbourne Storm having won the 2020 grand final at ANZ Stadium on Sunday night by defeating the minor premiers, the valiant Penrith Panthers.

For the first time in many years I have total confidence in the Blues winning all three Origin matches by comfortably beating the Maroons team coached by Wayne Bennett.

Eric Palm, Gympie, Queensland "" " When I am under pressure and things don't go my way in the workplace, can I have the same rights as Craig Bellamy does in the coaching booth please?

We're talking the right to go "full crazy" here - the type of Ren & Stimpy Show theatrics, you know, neck muscles bulging with eyes popping out of their sockets screaming into the microphone then Kung Fu kicking a chair.

Great viewing for the kiddies don't you think? Leaves you wondering, is there a sin bin for coaches?

Robert Brown, Davistown

Strip search victims deserve full government backing All Australians should be outraged at the abhorrent treatment of 13 of our women in Qatar in the last few days (Women in strip search outrage, 26/10).

The federal government must voice its outrage in the strongest of terms. Our citizens have a right to expect safe and unhindered travel throughout the world.

They certainly have a right to be treated with privacy, respect and dignity. The victims of this deprivation of liberty and decency are entitled to a formal apology, if not financial compensation from the Qatar authorities. The federal government must insist on this happening.

John George, Terrigal

Qatar to pay the price When we can travel overseas again, it might be worth remembering the gross, offensive, embarrassing and invasive treatment that some women were subjected to by over- zealous staff on the tarmac of Doha airport (Women in strip search outrage, 26/10).

This behaviour would not be tolerated here and we wouldn't expect it anywhere else.

Future travels through Qatar might now be off tourists' plans. Marg Swindells, Castle Hill

Not the time for greed How many of the people who have lost their jobs due to the pandemic would love to earn the money these CFMEU types are earning now but, typical, the union heavies want more and more (Building union's 'gouge', 26/10).

They don't care that we are already, as a country, on our knees looking for a way up out of this COVID-19 plight. They are just greedy thugs.

Pat, Narara

It takes more than words Great reflection on the changing of the meaning of specific words, Tim Blair (Leftist war on words - column, 26/10).

Over the last 20 years we have witnessed major changes within our cultural, educational, political, and communications institutions.

Sure, words have been mightier than the sword in the advancement of equal rights, same-sex unions and individual freedoms.

But we are now witnessing daily 'superior moral voices' playing hypocrite in order to change past moral choices.

We must decide on our choices and newer pathways in pursuit of contented relationships, satisfactory employment and a safer united multicultural Australia.

Words are an important part of change - actions, however, require acceptance. R. Brown, Ballina

Horse sense not present Since 1861 the Melbourne Cup has been the race that stops a nation, and packs a racecourse - but not this year (Cup will be empty without a crowd, 26/10).

The only people at the track self- distancing will be horses and jockeys. The Victorian government has rejected the Victoria Racing Club submission to host a small crowd within public health guidelines.

This comes at a time when large crowds in NSW and Queensland watched football grand finals.

For the time being horse sense in Victoria seems to be off the menu. Peter Penglis, Kambah, ACT

Little let-up down south The frustrations of Victorians spending a long weekend of severely restricted movements while drones reportedly kept an eye on private gatherings would have been compounded when Premier Dan Andrews' promised significant announcement turned out a fizzer (Fury over Dandemic reopening setback, 26/10).

Even the mostly friendly media that attend his briefings turned on him. That up to 50 mourners can now attend outdoor funerals must be of little comfort to relatives of the coronavirus victims who lost their lives due to the hotel quarantine bungle.

Brian Whybrow, Wanniassa, ACT

A question of balance Memo to Victorian Premier Daniel Andrews - living with COVID-19 requires dealing with balancing both the health and economic fronts (Fury over Dandemic reopening setback 26/10).

The World Health Organisation's advice to limit using lockdowns to fight the pandemic is straight from the horse's mouth and ready for Dan Andrews' urgent consumption.

Steve Ngeow, Chatswood

Hot end put on hold Drought-breaking rain with more to come, dams full to overflowing, two thirds of the way through spring and maximum temperatures of 16C.

No wonder the alarmists have abandoned the phrase "global warming" as their mantra in prophesying the end of the world as we know it.

Brent Hedges, Manly

Clean up dirty politics One cannot help but concur with Paul Sobb re the accusations against Gladys Berejiklian (Private life is not the key - Letters, 24/10). Unless she can be proven to have assisted Daryl Maguire in his alleged dealings then the subject should be closed.

The Opposition's call for her to step down is thus unfair. It is part of what seems to be endemic in politics at all levels.

If you are in opposition, attacking the morals and character of governing members, in order to (hopefully) persuade the public to vote against them, seems a common and distasteful practice.

Ms Berejiklian has had a failed relationship which may in itself be distressing and she does not deserve ridicule for it.

I might point out that personal relationships in this country are not illegal. Vilification is.

Selma Behm, Gosford

Briefly … These days, so many people act like they are the star of their own reality TV show, gracelessly pushing themselves forward to be noticed. Bonza, Fairfield, Victoria "" " Do the construction union leaders have any brains (Building union's 'gouge', 26/10)? Australia is in a recession due to the COVID pandemic and you want a 15 per cent pay rise. What a hide you have.

Dazza, Singleton "" " Save Victoria - Peter V'landys for Premier!

Cookie, Sawtell "" " The golf course bunker and the NRL bunker are similar - they are both hazards to be avoided.

G. Hutton, Saratoga

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001