Elevation should be on merit THE Prime Minister's panic reshuffle is an over-reaction to a perceived problem regarding women in Parliament (Fair go for fairer sex as PM shuffles deck, 30/3).

I am not concerned how many women are ministers in his Government. What I want is the most competent ministry, irrespective of gender, that can take our country forward.

I don't think we have that in this reshuffle and we will suffer for it. Our Prime Minister seems to have lost his way recently and we may suffer for decisions made in haste to satisfy the minority leftist activists who are hellbent on ruining our great country.

The 'silent majority' need to speak up before it's too late. G. Hutton, Saratoga

HOW demeaning it would be if I were to be promoted simply on the basis of gender (Fair go for fairer sex as PM shuffles deck, 30/3).

I want a promotion on the basis of merit; that is qualifications, experience and achievements.

Introducing quotas is discriminatory towards males.

Rita Zammit, Concord

Base load power still the mainstay A VERY interesting article penned by our Opposition leader, Anthony Albanese (A plan to grow jobs and secure Australia's future, 30/3). He stated that Australia could lead the world by exporting lithium batteries to other nations of the world. The problem there is most countries are manufacturing goods by using base load power, such as coal, gas and nuclear. So why would they want our batteries?

Perhaps Mr Albanese can tell us what year or century batteries will be able to store the energy required to produce Australians steel, aluminium and the 1001 other products needed to make manufacturing in Australia more viable. It would be marvellous to build products such as trains in this country but you would need cheap, 24/7 reliable energy, which renewable energy cannot supply.  Then, of course, you have our unions, which would price Australia out of the market to supply such a product. Look what happened to the car industry.

Nice try Albo, but you need to go back to the drawing board. Bruce Rollo, Wollongbar

Where are the markets?

When Labor's Anthony Albanese can define the areas where Australian products have, at least, competitive equality, his latest pipe dream is just that.

Australia suffers from it's lack of volume markets, high wage structure combined with the cost of our tyranny of distance in distribution. I'm sure our manufacturers will be interested in the results of Labor's findings.

John Grundy, Online

What's the catch?

Labor leader Anthony Albanese promises to give manufacturing a good kick along with his proposed National Reconstruction Fund to be worth $15 billion. This should be the long awaited music to our ears. Why hasn't the Government done this already, it doesn't need a Rhodes Scholar to identify the need for such an initiative.

But I have two concerns here: first, how genuine Labor is with this commitment; and second, what will be the union involvement?

Will this be another 'superannuation fund' arrangement where unions dominate the proposed 'independent board'? There has to be a catch somewhere.

John George, Terrigal

Green with energy Congratulations to the NSW Government on their appointment of former PM Malcolm Turnbull to a climate advisory board.

Can anyone think of a better way for Mr Turnbull to signal his environmental credentials and commitment to the cause than by building a row of wind turbine generators on South Head? How many of the woke folk of the eastern suburbs would get that warm and fuzzy feeling with a permanent visual reminder of the death of the evil coal? Or he could festoon Red Hill, just behind Parliament House in Canberra, with wind towers.  Imagine the virtue signal to the rest of the world with our parliament overlooked by a green energy source.

Bruce Collison, Banks, ACT

SES to the rescue Congratulations to former prime minister Tony Abbott for digging in and helping out cleaning up the devastation left by the recent flooding (Tony lends a hand in flood clean-up, 30/3).

It's a shame there aren't a few more ex pollies like you out there lending a hand.

Brian Dorsett. Gorokan

Setting an example Isn't it wonderful to see a former prime minister out in our trouble spots doing what he can for the good of the community. An unheralded Tony Abbott leads some others for dead in the fair dinkum stakes. This community spirited man is what Australia's about, he's what Australia stands for. Past and present politicians should consider taking a leaf out of Tony's book.

Peter Cattlin, Freshwater

Quotas not the way Louise Roberts (Merit must come first, 30/3) is right. The push for more female representation and talk of quotas in Parliament will only lead to token appointments and potentially do more harm than good.

Yes, there should be more women in Parliament. Not just for the sake of diversity but because, shock horror, competence isn't just a bastion of the male genome.

But a bid to get more women elected to Parliament amid a furore over sexual assault and harassment does nothing to eradicate systemic failures and the appalling behaviours of the few bad apples, many of whom being unelected staffers. I think gender-based quotas places constraints and undermines the benefits of bringing a more diverse representation of people including not only gender, but race, age, experience and other.

Dr Jack Dikian, Mosman

Wuhan virus, in a name I'm confused? We were told by the PC brigade that we must not call the Wuhan, Chinese virus by its place of origin but must use the generic term COVID-19. If we did call it the Wuhan virus or Chinese virus we'd be racist.

But it's now OK to label the same virus in all its mutating forms by the place where it mutated and the new strain identified. So we have the UK/British/English strain (the Chinese Communist Party loves calling it that), the South African strain and what's being called "the most dangerous, most lethal strain"... the Brazilian variant.

Why the change in naming policy and who decides what's now OK? I haven't heard complaints from the UK, South African or Brazilian governments.

They accept the truth, the reality of the disease's origins, so why not China, the place that gave the world this insidious disease?

Paul Maher, Canberra

Briefly ...

We learn today that former PM Malcolm Turnbull has been appointed by NSW Cabinet to chair a new climate policy board. How would he get such a gig given his legacy of submarines that will never be built and the albatross that is Snowy 2.0? I'm hoping this is an April Fool's Day joke mistakenly released a few days early.

Rob Jones, Panania

* * * Well Louise Roberts knows what she is talking about (Merit must come first, 30/3). If a woman is up to the job give her a go at it but don't just put them in there to make the numbers look equal. That's what the Labor Party has been pushing for years and if the government pushes that way they could miss out on some very smart men who have run large organisations that can help the country forge ahead. Smart people run governments, not numbers in equality.

Michael, Lithgow

* * * It's probably a good time to remind the Parramatta sport scientist that Scott Morrison has a lot more fans than the Eels will ever have, and that sport and politics should always be separate (PM cops an eely stare, 29/3).

Jack Jackson, Burleigh Heads

HAVE YOUR SAYMAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001