PRIME Minister Scott Morrison insists Australia should back an inquiry into the origin of the COVID-19 -outbreak as US President Donald Trump suggests China unleashed the virus as a "mistake".

Mr Morrison said his government would speak in favour of a European Union resolution to set up an independent investigation into the outbreak. The resolution will be put to the World Health Assembly meeting in Geneva later this month.

Asked what he thought of a -suggestion the virus could have emerged from a Chinese laboratory, Mr Morrison said he had seen no -evidence to suggest that had been the likely source.

"The reports (about the Wuhan lab) … they were public, they were being reported at the time, so of course the government was aware of those suggestions," he said.

"There hasn't been anything subsequent that would have borne out those initial reports as far as our -government is concerned." The PM said the "most likely -scenario that has been canvassed relates to wildlife wet markets".

"This is one of the reasons why it is important we have an objective, -independent assessment of how this originated and learn the lessons of how this occurred," he said.

Mr Morrison said the investigation being recommended to the global assembly was an entirely sensible -suggestion and would help countries respond more quickly to future outbreaks.

However, Mr Trump speculated that China could have unleashed the coronavirus on the world due to a horrible "mistake", and his intelligence agencies said they were still examining the idea - put forward by the president and aides - that the pandemic may have resulted from an accident at a Chinese laboratory.

The Office of the Director of National Intelligence, the clearing house for the web of US spy agencies, said it had ruled out the virus being man-made but was still investigating the precise source of the global pandemic, which has killed more than 220,000 people worldwide.

Mr Trump suggested he had seen evidence to support the theory that the origin was an infectious disease lab in Wuhan, the epicentre of the Chinese outbreak, and said the US was now "finding how it came out".

"It's a terrible thing," he said. "Whether they made a mistake or whether it started off as a mistake and then they made another one, or did somebody do something on purpose." The US Intelligence Community (IC) statement said the federal -agencies concurred "with the wide scientific consensus that the COVID-19 virus was not man-made or genetically modified".

"The IC will continue to rigorously examine emerging information and intelligence to determine whether the outbreak began through contact with infected animals or if it was the result of an accident at -a laboratory in Wuhan," the statement said.

Earlier yesterday, Mr Morrison said Australia was working "every day" on its relationship with China.

Chinese ambassador to Australia Cheng Jingye has floated the idea of a consumer boycott of Australian -products in retaliation if Canberra supports the investigation into the outbreak.Liberal MP Trent Zimmerman said Chinese diplomats had been "downright despicable and menacing" since Australia started pressing the case for a review.