AGRIBUSINESS Grain import cut not so crucial CHINA has slashed its Australian wheat imports to an almost 10-year low as Beijing ramps up its attack on Australian farm commodities and threatens to disrupt international trade worth hundreds of millions of dollars a year.

China imported 880 tonnes of Australian wheat in November - the lowest since 2011 - according to customs data, as tensions between Beijing and Canberra show no signs of abating. Australia exports about $4.6bn worth of wheat a year globally, with China accounting for about 10 per cent.

Beijing's tightening on Australian wheat comes amid a blockbuster crop for Australian farmers, with production forecast to more than double this season to about 31 million tonnes, according to the Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics (ABARE).

China's communist regime has already slapped punitive tariffs or banned a range of Australian products from barley, timber and beef, to wine and seafood after Scott Morrison sought an inquiry into the origins of COVID-19 and Australia's foreign interfer-ence laws angered Beijing.

It comes as the world wheat price is forecast to surge 11 per cent this financial year to an average of $US245 ($322.50) a tonne, reflecting a fall in production in some major exporting countries in 2020-21, and dryness during the 2021-22 winter crop planting window in the US, the European Union and Russia, ABARE said in its December quarterly report.

High domestic grain prices are expected also to result in China's total wheat import demand being the highest in 25 years, at eight million tonnes.

"This demand is likely to be met by wheat exports from the US and the Black Sea -region," ABARE said.

"Smaller exportable surpluses from these major exporters will provide Australia with an opportunity to meet demand in other markets," it said.

Australian wheat is highly sought after in Asian markets, and more than 30 per cent is used in Asian noodles thanks to Australian wheat's starch and protein quality.

Indonesia is the biggest buyer of Australian wheat, with exports worth about $739m a year, more than double the Chinese wheat trade, which is worth about $346m. Other top Asian markets for Australian wheat include the Philippines ($465m), Vietnam ($404m) and Korea ($361m).

Australian grain growers have been anticipating China to target wheat but, unlike barley where China has historically bought 60-70 per cent of Australia's crop, it hasn't been a crucial market for Australian wheat. ABARE warned of continuing disruptions in Australia's trade with China, "despite the economic benefits trade brings to both countries", with the biggest hits to barley and wine.