It was Chinese philosopher Confucius who said before you embark on a journey of revenge, dig two graves. The Chinese Communist government would be familiar with the musings of Confucius but they certainly didn't have that little gem of wisdom in mind when they declared war on our barley and meat industries.

All because we had the temerity to ask for an inquiry into the origins of the coronavirus. If it wasn't so serious it would be comical. The bully beating up on the little kid because he can.

But guess what? That bully in the playground has a willing mate. The Victorian government and our university sector have put the almighty dollar before our national interest.

As such, we're actually not all in this together. Australia's most left-wing government, Victoria, and the university sector, a hotbed for Marxism, are cosying up to the Chinese Communist Party at a time when most Australians are aghast at Beijing's bullying tactics.

As China comes down hard on our barley and beef producers, the Victorian government continues its belt and road folly with the Chinese. This policy allows the Communist country to get a major foothold into Victoria through infrastructure projects.

Meanwhile, at the University of Queensland, they continue to go after a student who organised anti-China and pro-Hong Kong rallies.

Let's not forget that Australia's tertiary education system is heavily reliant on Chinese students.

In Victoria, we've had the unedifying comments of its treasurer Tim Pallas, saying the federal government had "vilified" China by leading the call for an independent inquiry into the origins of COVID-19. Seriously, Pallas should resign. It's that simple. If Pallas thinks we've vilified the Chinese by trying to keep them accountable he doesn't deserve to be in public office.

As for UQ student Drew Pavlou, he and his legal eagle Tony Morris walked out of a disciplinary hearing because they say UQ was not complying with its own charter by refusing to hand over documents required for Pavlou's defence - a claim UQ strongly denies.

Those documents allegedly related to the university's vice-chancellor liaising with the Chinese consulate on how they should manage the public relations response to the Pavlou matter.

That imbroglio is now headed for a likely hearing in the Supreme Court. For Victoria and the universities, the pursuit of the almighty dollar has affected their judgment. Australia has 14 Confucius Institutes and there's one in the NSW Department of Education. Nowhere is the increasing level of interdependence between China and Australia more evident than in the academic landscape. As China flexes its economic muscle, bullying Australia with its rhetoric and actions, the pandering of Victoria and the universities to Beijing is not a good look.