Interstate showpiece a sure thing in revamped 2020 season

NRL innovation boss Wayne Pearce has given State of Origin the green light for lift-off under the code's Project -Apollo program, with Fox Sports ready to pounce for rugby league's showpiece event.

Pearce has erased any doubt over the future of Origin this season, insisting the coronavirus pandemic will not halt the 40th anniversary of interstate clashes between NSW and Queensland this season.

And the battle for broadcast rights is hotting up, with Fox Sports' rugby league arm expressing interest in covering the $90 million three-game -series amid question marks over Channel 9's funding -contribution to the NRL.

The NRL premiership is set for an abbreviated 2020 campaign and there were fears a scheduling squeeze on the club season would leave no time to accommodate the six-week Origin battle in the calendar.

The newly-formed NRL innovation committee will meet on Thursday to provide definitive answers for the season structure, but chairman Pearce, a NSW legend, is -adamant Origin will not be axed this year.

"State of Origin is definitely happening," said Pearce, who played 15 Origin games.

"Where we schedule Origin will depend on the competition structure and whether we go ahead with two (club) conferences ... do we play Origin at the back end of the season, the start or the middle?

"The pros and cons will be discussed so everything will be put on the table for us at our meeting next week, but Origin is definitely on the radar." ARL Commission chairman Peter V'landys backed Pearce's assessment, saying: "We are determined to play State of Origin this year.

"If we start the season in September, we can just fit -Origin into the schedule." Channel 9 is the broadcasting home of State of Origin, but whether the dulcet tones of Ray Warren will be heard calling the names of Queensland and NSW stars this season remains to be seen.

On Wednesday, the NRL failed to receive its quarterly broadcasting payment of around $46.2 million from Channel 9, which stands to save $130 million if the COVID-19 crisis forces the cancellation of the 2020 season.

The NRL is increasingly confident of a return to play later this season. But if Origin is scheduled for September, October or November - the spring months that Channel 9 insists is not a hot ratings period for rugby league - it could open the door for Fox Sports to beef-up its league programming.

Channel 9 has the exclusive rights to Origin but if the -network baulks at a funding package, Fox Sports head of television Steve Crawley said the pay TV operator would put out the welcome mat.

"Rugby league is our staple at Fox," Crawley said.

There are suggestions the Origin series could kick off the relaunch of the NRL season and former Queensland skipper Darren Lockyer is not opposed to that idea."Both teams would be coming from the same base so I don't see any issue starting the season again with Origin straight away," he said.