Attempts by Queensland and other states to keep their borders shut is not only in defiance of medical advice, but is putting the entire country's recovery at stake Queensland's bid to turn the pandemic into the coronavirus State of Origin, pitting itself against Gladys Berejiklian and NSW, is one of the great missteps this country has seen in the handling of this virus.

As Treasurer Dominic Perrottet quipped to me yesterday, "only in Queensland would they want to buy an airline but ban planes leaving the airport".

The absurdity of the ban by Queensland and other states on interstate travel while tourism opens up within borders would be comical if it didn't represent such a cruel blow to jobs and our national economy.

While Berejiklian has led the charge to open up borders between the states, the premiers of Queensland, Western Australia, South Australia and Tasmania who are resisting the idea are showing blatant disregard for the underpinnings of our -federation.

Let's be clear on one thing. The push to reopen the borders is not about "letting the virus rip" or sacrificing vulnerable lives to the gods of GDP, as the likes of Queensland's Annastacia Palaszczuk and Western Australia's Mark McGowan have crudely and cynically portrayed it.

In fact, Deputy Chief Medical Officer Paul Kelly has made it clear that there is no health advice warranting interstate border closures.

The rates of community transmission are so low across the country -experts believe the border closures make little difference.

Safety is not the danger here. -Instead, the risk is that having all but won the war against coronavirus, at least within our own borders, Palaszczuk and her fellow panicky -premiers risk costing us the peace, which should come in the form of a robust recovery.

Instead, these politically driven border closures quite simply put an almighty handbrake on the national economy and desperate tourism -sector, which could take a decade to recover if restrictions are not eased soon.

And for those other states who are pointing the finger at NSW and dramatising our now-minuscule caseload, we are still outstripping the other major states when it comes to economic confidence.

This is despite NSW being hardest hit by virus cases and job losses. The Westpac survey, taken between May 4-8 showed the consumer sentiment index in NSW rebounded sharply rising 22.9 per cent to 91.1 Queensland sits at just 87.3, Western Australia at 90.3, Victoria at 85 and South Australia at 83.7.

The index across the country is still relatively weak by historic standards, however it shows NSW has suc-ceeded in communicating to its citizens that there is an economic pathway out of our current torpor.

I asked Premier Berejiklian how she explains these figures, given our state has been hardest hit.

"I think firstly because NSW is -innovative and resilient. But I also thing - at the risk of sounding a bit immodest - that our government has kept focusing on jobs and has said that and demonstrated that," she told me in an interview.

"Even though we know people are suffering and hurting I think they also feel confident there's a way out.

"I don't want to take away from the misery a lot of households are feeling but for others I think there's an air of potential hope that things will get a bit better or that they have some level of security." It is for this reason - jobs and the economy - that NSW is red hot on opening borders.

It's also worth remembering Berejiklian was easily one of the most cautious of all leaders in the nation as this crisis unfolded. She wanted to go harder and faster on lock-ups, including school shutdowns.

And yet she never shut the state's borders. Her moves to push for other states to lift theirs cannot possibly be interpreted as being lax on safety.

Palaszczuk keeps pointing to the fact that NSW has the most active cases in the country.

This is in no small part because Sydney is still the gateway to Australia, and we have been quarantining thousands upon thousands of citizens from other states in our hotels for two weeks when they return home from overseas.

Many of the state's cases recently have been detected among these travellers, before they have been released into the community.

Of course NSW cannot escape its blame for the Ruby Princess fiasco, or the Newmarch aged care outbreak.

But neither of these things should mean that we now put the national economy and jobs at risk by prolonging unnecessary border restrictions.

Palaszczuk in particular is playing with fire. Facing an election this year, her hubris on this border issue will be dimly viewed by voters in places like Cairns, the Whitsundays and swaths of regional Queensland who are on their knees because of a dearth of tourism.

"NSW is focused on getting our economy back and firing on all cylinders and we see trade and tourism as an important part of that," Perrottet told me yesterday.

"Queensland's border policy is -ultimately a matter for their leaders, but the real economic losers are tourism operators and business owners who need as much help as possible as they emerge from the COVID-19 lockdown." The irony is, when it comes to tourism, the NSW sector can benefit from the current circumstances.

All those Sydneysiders who crave the north Queensland warmth can head to regional NSW instead.

As Berejiklian said, we will welcome other state's tourists here even if they won't welcome us in their holiday towns.

This country can be stronger without warring premiers who delight in the sounds of their own chest beating. Bring down the borders and give tourism operators and jobs a fair shot.