World Hoax Organization PAPER TIGER THE World Health Organisation has been slammed for failing to pass on life-saving information about COVID-19 in the early stages of the disease's spread - and its "cosy" relationship with China is to blame, critics say.

With the coronavirus pandemic continuing to kill thousands across the globe, the WHO has been more concerned with issuing a directive about the "stigma" attached to the illness.

It chastised US President Donald Trump for referring to the origins of the disease as a "Chinese virus", saying: "The stigma is more dangerous than the virus itself … stigma is the most dangerous enemy". It also warned against calling people who contract the virus "victims" or to talk about people "infecting others" or "spreading" the virus because it assigns blame.

The WHO has been called on to increase its attention on China as the nation prepares to restart its economy after its corona shutdown. But China experts in Australia warn that is unlikely to happen because of the "cosy relationship" between the world health body and the communist state.

It comes as US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo repeated his charge that Beijing had delayed sharing information on COVID-19 and "truly put thousands of lives at risk".

"My concern is that this cover-up, this disinformation that the Chinese Communist Party is engaged in, is still denying the world the information it needs so that we can prevent further cases or something like this from recurring again," he said.

Taiwan's vice president Chen Chien-jen said his nation had told the WHO that human-to-human transmission was possible in December, but its failure to pass that information on until mid January meant "an opportunity to raise the alert level both in China and the wider world was lost".

Author Clive Hamilton, whose book Silent Invasion warned of Chinese influence in Australia, urged the WHO to monitor China's claims that it was virus free and able to restart its economy.

"When the virus began the WHO, instead of listening to the medical staff on the ground, accepted the line of the Chinese Communist Party," Mr Hamilton said.

"Thousands of people have died outside China because the WHO kept repeating the misleading messages of the Chinese Communist Party. The protesting voices of the citizens were the ones telling the truth." He said at the heart of the cosy relationship was the WHO's politically correct director general, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus.Mr Ghebreyesus' home country of Ethiopia receives massive bundles of Chinese cash.