BRONCOS coach Anthony Seibold has broken his silence on David Fifita's bombshell de-parture to the Titans, insisting there was no dressing-room rift with Gold Coast's new $3.5 million man.

In his first interview on Fifita's decision to quit the Broncos at the end of the season, Seibold -addressed rumours the Queensland Origin star walked away amid concerns over the club's direction under the besieged Brisbane coach.

Seibold has maintained over the past six months he was confident of keeping Fifita, and as late as last Thursday Brisbane believed the superstar backrower would remain loyal.

Fifita's decision to accept a three-year, $3.5 million deal with the Titans went beyond money. The 20-year-old is said to be concerned over player unrest and his own development under Seibold.

Seibold is bitterly disappointed to lose Fifita but adamant his coach-player rapport with Brisbane's best backrow discovery in 20 years was not a factor in his defection to the Titans.

"All I want to say about Dave is that he made the decision that is best for him and his family," Seibold said before Friday night's clash against the Sharks at Suncorp Stadium.

"I am disappointed to lose Dave because he is someone I feel I have a good relationship with. I never wanted to see him go. I don't want to go into too much detail about this but I'm very respectful of Dave and his family.

"We all know a lot of details around Dave's situation and the only thing I want Dave to do now is focus on this year and do his job for us. I am looking forward to what Dave can do for us before he leaves." Fifita made his debut under former Broncos coach Wayne Bennett in 2018 and he kicked on last year, making his Queensland Origin debut in Seibold's maiden campaign at Red Hill.

But ructions appeared to surface earlier this season when Fifita picked up a knee injury in the season opener against the Cowboys and was chosen to play the following week against Souths at Suncorp Stadium.

It is understood Fifita had concerns about playing the Rabbitohs. He subsequently had knee surgery during the NRL's two-month COVID-19 hiatus, although he hoped to return this week against the Sharks.

Fifita's comeback has been put on ice and Seibold plans to unleash him against the Bunnies on Friday week.

Broncos board member Darren Lockyer backed Seibold's view that Brisbane did everything possible to keep Fifita. "With the dollars on offer, it's life-changing for him and his family," he said. "That sort of money may never be on the table again."