A torn calf tendon - and not his widely reported knee issue - is what forced Andrew Fifita to wait three months before returning to the NRL last week.

Claiming his knee is as good as it's "ever been" and that medical retirement hadn't been considered, the ex-NSW Origin prop instead told how he had deliberately bulked-up to 124kg - as he plans to play less minutes, but with a higher rate of force and power.

"My knee is actually really good at the moment - probably the best it's ever been. I'm squatting 270, close to 300 kilos. It was just about getting that calf right (before I could play again)," Fifita said yesterday.

The senior Sharks forward underwent a knee arthroscope and stem cell surgery at the end of last year, which given his limited pre-season forced his withdrawal from the NRL and Indigenous All Stars match in February.

He recovered to feature in Cronulla's first two rounds (Souths and Melbourne) before the COVID-19 premiership shutdown .

Fifita played his first match in three months last week against St George Illawarra, explaining his season was dented less than 24-hours after returning to training in early May.

"I trained all over the break, I felt as fit as ever. And then when I came back in on the first day on the field, I tore my calf," Fifita said.

"It was the worst feeling.

"During the break, I really knuckled down ... to be the fittest I could be. I installed a home gym and really took it upon myself - and to have that (torn calf) happen, it was the toughest thing.

"The first two rounds I was playing at 119kg - which I felt was way too light for my liking. So I wanted to go up and put the right muscle in the right places, especially a lot more muscle in my legs, so that was the main focus over the (COVID-19) break.

"I feel really comfortable with where I'm at.

"The best thing for our team with the limited minutes I'm getting, I can afford to put on those extra kilos.

"If I was playing my usual 65-70 minutes, I'd probably drop a few kilos, but at the moment I feel comfortable." Fifita played 43 minutes against the Dragons, producing 12 carries for 107m. "It was a risk to play on the weekend with my calf, but it's kind of tough at the moment with the Sharkies and I really needed to get out there and help my club," Fifita said. "I think there's a lot of outside noise when it comes to me personally, but at the moment, my body is doing really well."