The relaunched NRL season promises more excitement and controversy than before, writes NICK WALSHAW

COVID-19 tests?

Check.

Security sweep of Bankwest Stadium?

Check.

Disinfected gyms, quarantined footballers and everyone vaccinated for flu? Check, check and … ah, close enough.

Nine weeks after world sport went into lockdown, the NRL is finally readying for what shapes as the greatest Australian comeback outside another Farnsey concert.

Truly, everywhere you look is an interesting story.

None bigger, of course, than Latrell Mitchell at South Sydney. But, geez, you've gotta love the Roosters chasing a third-straight title from 12th. Or Parramatta, after their first premiership since way back when Pricey played with grease in his beard.

Up in Brisbane, the Broncos again look a force. While in Townsville, Valentine Holmes is back from the NFL.

And how big a story is Nathan Cleary when he finally returns in the Panthers' No. 7 jersey?

All of this, too, before we get to the new world order under Australian Rugby League Commission chairman Peter V'landys (inset, below).

For this, remember, is the NRL comeback so many thought impossible. Others, irresponsible.

Regardless, V'landys and his small mob of believers pushed on anyway. Which means at a time where other sporting codes are only now beginning to stick large cotton swabs deep into their athletes' orifices, rugby league is preparing to kick off.

Which matters. Big time.

Starting with a Thursday Night Football blockbuster between Parramatta and Brisbane, the NRL is now set to whirl through 18 weeks before finals, a decider and then - gasp - State of Origin.

Wonderfully, crowds are being tipped for October, too.

With V'landys already in discussions with biosecurity experts about getting you, me and everyone else back into grounds before the year is out, until then, of course, you can always flick on the idiot box.

With confidence, too.

For more than being Australia's first footy code back in action, rugby league is also the most suited for TV screens.

Which again matters.

So blow that whistle and let Jason Taumalolo run wild.

Same deal James Tedesco, Bronson Xerri and whichever young gun is set to come from nowhere to make his name during the rest of 2020.

Get excited, too, about the prospect of St George Illawarra flyer Matt Dufty in space. Or Gold Coaster Jai Arrow in traffic. All of it bloody wonderful.

Especially now that we've seen what happens when rugby league disappears, right? First, anti-vaxxing becomes a thing.

Soon after, referees threaten to walk away.

And all while our superstars make headlines for everything from firearms and front kicks through to freshly choreographed Tik Tok dances.

Worse, have been the weekends.

With the simple truth being that, between trips to Bunnings, you can only watch so many Winfield Cup re-runs before Super Saturday becomes … well, slightly less super.

But now, thankfully, normal viewing has returned. Which isn't to say things won't be missing.

They will.

None more obvious than crowds, a second referee and Nathan Cleary for those first couple of rounds.

But when he gets back?

Understand the Panthers will be no joke. Same deal Canberra. Throw in too those competition-leading Eels, where new halves coach Andrew Johns could prove the year's best buy.

Up in Newcastle, rookie coach Adam O'Brien is off to a flyer. While at Souths, the old bloke has one more crack. All of this, too, before even considering that Dessie Hasler's Sea Eagles outfit boasts a pair of Trbojevic brothers.

Elsewhere, Freddy is gunning for a third-straight Origin series. While Robbo, he wants the first three-peat coach since Big Jack wore a kangaroo coat.

Which Melbourne Storm will be looking to challenge, of course. Just as they always do.

Same as at Wests Tigers, Benji Marshall will be looking to sprinkle whatever magic dust is left.

While at Canterbury, Kieran Foran will be asking the footy gods for nothing more than to stay together.

Certainly you reckon he deserves some luck.

Ditto V'landys and his new ruck rules. Or maybe it's the Warriors who really get the greatest return on all they've given.

Regardless, it's great to have the game back.

KICK-OFF TIME ROUND 3 - THURSDAY MAY 28 SUNCORP STADIUM 7.50PM BRONCOS v EELS