'Either way, I've got to give them a bit of a heads up' CAMERON Smith is three weeks away from deciding whether to end the most extraordinary career in rugby league history.

The Storm great told The Saturday Telegraph he would have discussions with coach Craig Bellamy, conscious that a decision needs to be made sooner rather than later.

The career of boom Wests Tigers loan player Harry Grant is resting on his decision.

"I'm not going to string them out and leave them high and dry," Smith said. "Either way, I've got to give them a bit of a heads up." Those closest to Smith are indicating the eight-time Dally M hooker of the year will call it quits after a remarkable career that started in 2002 and has seen him run out in Storm colours for 420 NRL games.

Asked if he was mindful of Grant's future with the club, Smith said: "It's not just Harry, it's the entire squad.

"There's also Brandon Smith. There's the entire salary cap. Me playing or not playing doesn't just affect those two.

"I'm certainly very conscious of the situation around our club and where everyone's career is at.

"All that will come into consideration when I make my decision." Even at 37 years of age - he had his birthday last month - Smith is playing outstanding football.

He may no longer be the No.1 player in the NRL but he is certainly in the top half dozen, whether it be at hooker or guiding Storm from the halves while Cameron Munster is injured.

The former Kangaroos captain says he has the support of his wife Barbara and family whichever way he goes: "She's a legend my missus and she'll support any decision I make." Storm chairman Matt Tripp says there is no pressure on Smith. "No one will be rushing Cameron," Tripp said. "What he's done for Melbourne Storm gives him every entitlement to move at his own pace and think through what's best for himself and his family." Sadly, Smith will not get the opportunity for a home-ground farewell in Melbourne if he decides to retire because of COVID-19 and the closure of Victoria's stadiums, most probably for the rest of the year.

He says the talks with coach Craig Bellamy will be crucial in mid-August. "Craig's never been one with guys like Billy, Cooper or Ryan Hoffman to walk up and say 'give it away'," Smith said.

"But I'd like to get his thoughts. We've been close for such a long time." One thing Smith has ruled out is a State of Origin comeback for the Maroons in November.

"It's raised every year," he said. "It won't be happening.

"Queensland have some really good number nines running around at the moment "Harry (Grant), Reed Mahoney and Jakey Friend are all playing fantastic footy."

RUGBY LEAGUE'S OLD BOYS' CLUB Paul Gallen (Cronulla) 38 years 31 days Cliff Lyons (Manly) 37 years 313 days Cameron Smith (Melbourne) 37 years 23 days Darren Smith (Brisbane) 36 years 284 days Chris Heighington (Newcastle) 36 years 230 days Jeremy Smith (Newcastle) 36 years 142 days Petero Civoniceva (Brisbane) 36 years 140 days Adam MacDougall (Newcastle) 36 years 126 days Allan Langer (Brisbane) 36 years 60 days