… AND WHO'S AVAILABLE IF COACH OF LOSING CLUB IN TOMORROW'S CLASH IS SHOWN THE DOOR REVEALED These 14 names prove just how cut-throat the world of NRL coaching is. Ahead of what is a must-win game for under-pressure St George Illawarra mentor Paul McGregor and Canterbury's Dean Pay, DAVID RICCIO and MICHAEL CARAYANNIS reveal which coach is ready to replace them.

Trent Barrett Penrith assistant coach A former captain and Dally M winner at the Dragons after making his debut for the Steelers. The ex-Country Origin coach had mixed success during his three-year stint in charge of the Sea Eagles, which ended in 2018, when he had strong support from his playing group. Returned to the Panthers as an assistant coach this year and has also been part of the NSW coaching set-up in recent years.

Wayne Bennett Rabbitohs head coach The Bennett-Back-to-the-Dragons rumour won't go away.

But know this, if Bennett does return to where he won the premiership in 2010, he would need to regain the trust of owner and WIN chairman Andrew Gordon.

It was Gordon who Bennett backflipped on in the space of 24 hours in 2014. At Newcastle, Bennett said he'd quit to rejoin the Dragons in 2015, but reneged the next day to sign with Brisbane. The frugal Gordons are also only willing to pay a head coach around $500,000 - which is below Bennett's asking price.

Nathan Brown Consultant to the Warriors prior to COVID-19 restrictions On the hunt for a full-time NRL coaching role after quitting as coach of the Knights last year.

A former Dragons player and coach, Brown shares an extremely tight relationship with St George Illawarra Dragons director Peter Doust. The board that will decide the next coach.

Cameron Ciraldo Penrith assistant coach.

Considered one of the best young coaches in the game with an ambition to become an NRL coach. Clearly others see that, too, given he replaced Anthony Griffin in the final six weeks of the 2018 season, winning three from six matches. In 2019, he was pipped by Cronulla coach John Morris for the Sharks job.

Craig Fitzgibbon Roosters and NSW Blues assistant coach Dapto's favourite son and the man who Andrew Johns says should lead the Dragons revival.

Widely considered the next cab off the rank as far as NRL coaches go, he is defence-focused and boasts Trent Robinson's tutelage.

Interestingly, he's managed by David Riolo, the same agent as Paul McGregor.

Shane Flanagan St George-Illawarra assistant coach Peter V'landys said this week he wouldn't reduce Flanagan's head-coaching ban short to help fix the Dragons' problems. In addition, the NRL has confirmed to The Sunday Telegraph the premiership-winning coach hasn't applied to the NRL to coach the Red V or any club before the scheduled relaxation of his ban in 2022.

Anthony Griffin Former Brisbane, Penrith coach Was dramatically cut adrift as Penrith coach late in 2018 despite being on track for a finals appearance. Has a very strong coaching record, making the finals in each of his three full seasons at Penrith and three of his four years at Brisbane before being replaced by Wayne Bennett.

Todd Payten Warriors assistant coach Has served a long apprenticeship first at his former club the Wests Tigers before spending five years at the Cowboys as part of their premiership-winning coaching staff. Joined the Warriors last year. Learnt his trade playing under Tim Sheens at the Tigers. Highly regarded as a future NRL coach.

Steve Price Head coach Warrington Kicking goals in the UK Super League, Price has matured and developed immensely since being appointed head coach of the Dragons in 2012 at the age of 34.

The defensive coach for Cronulla in their 2016 premiership season, Price led Warrington to victory in last year's Challenge Cup Final.

Jason Ryles Storm assistant coach Ryles, who played for St George-Illawarra, the Roosters and the Storm as well as Super League side Catalans, is leaving Melbourne in November to work for England rugby union coach Eddie Jones as the national side's skills coach.

The move is all part of his learnings to become an NRL coach and remains deeply connected to the Dragons through his close mateship with Paul McGregor, Shaun Timmins and Mark Riddell.

Dean Young St George-Illawarra assistant coach The good oil suggests the son of Dragons football club board member Craig Young is the frontrunner to step up should Paul McGregor be moved on.

While he's been on the Dragons NRL coaching staff since 2015, the risk with Young is that the Red V would be appointing a rookie coach with no external experience in a time of crisis.

Geoff Toovey Former Manly grand final coach Had terrific success at his former club Manly, leading them to a premiership decider in his first season. Despite a 58 per cent winning record, was shown the door at the end of 2015. Hasn't landed a major coaching gig since, but did have a short stint coaching Bradford in the English lower tier. Has been out of the coaching game for a while, which will count against him.

Nathan Brown Consultant to the Warriors prior to COVID-19 restrictions On the hunt for a full-time NRL coaching role after quitting as coach of the Knights last year.

A former Dragons player and coach, Brown shares an extremely tight relationship with St George Illawarra Dragons director Peter Doust. The board that will decide the next coach.

Jason Ryles Storm assistant coach Ryles, who played for St George-Illawarra, the Roosters and the Storm as well as Super League side Catalans, is leaving Melbourne in November to work for England rugby union coach Eddie Jones as the national side's skills coach. The move is all part of his learnings to become an NRL coach and remains deeply connected to the Dragons through his close mateship with Paul McGregor, Shaun Timmins and Mark Riddell.