THE COVID-19 pandemic has left us with some -lasting social change and a myriad of new health -protocols that will undoubtedly remain long after this is over.

The virus has touched every part of society. It has been incredibly sad for so many families who have lost loved ones and life-shattering for those whose livelihoods have not recovered. But it has also been a live reminder of the kind of innovative thinking and can-do attitudes that have made this country great.

As in previous dark times in our history, people have turned to sport to help them through the trauma of lockdown and financial stress - and many of the individual sports have risen to the challenge during COVID more than at any other point in history.

In the past two weeks we have had successful Grand -Finals for the NRL and AFL - the latter -attracting incredible TV viewing numbers. And the racing industry in all states has worked hard to -continue race meetings within strict pandemic health protocols.

This has not been the case in many countries overseas in which governments have baulked on taking on critics who decided sport should not be a priority in official COVID management plans.

They also shied away from the additional costs -associated with providing safe environments for the players and officials while the competitions were under way.

Thankfully, most governments and sporting authorities in Australian were not that squeamish, -especially in NSW where the state government has given the NRL and racing permission, in particular, to not only operate but also allow COVID-safe crowds attend events live.

The determination in Australia to keep going has not only kept thousands of people in jobs, both -directly and indirectly, but has provided a distraction for fans crying out for some joy and activity in their lives.

Next week the NRL will run a fast-forward style State of Origin series. Three games over three weeks in different states.

As well as being bound by a strict COVID bubble, the series is unique in that it is being run over a -shorter period of time and outside the normal NRL season.

This could be a classic example of invention borne out of necessity and could signal a permanent change to the Origin tradition.

The NRL, players and fans should keep an open mind as this series plays out and consider whether it could work post-pandemic.

It certainly ticks a few boxes: It fills the gap between the end of the NRL season and the beginning of the cricket season proper, it means clubs don't lose key players during the season to Origin duties or injuries and the quicker format could add an extra dose of excitement. It is worth considering.

ARL Commission chairman Peter V'landys has said he wants to let the viewer numbers decide the fate of State of Origin being held in November.

But whatever happens, the NRL administration deserves more kudos for ingenuity. It wouldn't be the first time V'Landys pulled off a miracle.