STUCK ON THE COUCH? ENTERTAINMENT EXPERTS LEIGH PAATSCH, HOLLY BYRNES AND KATHY McCABE HAVE YOUR STAY-AT- HOME CHOICES COVERED

BOOKS CALM THE FARM Eleanor Oliphant Is Completely Fine by Gail Honeyman The original and best uplit book - there is a reason it's a bestseller! Eleanor has learned how to survive, but not how to live. Her life is carefully timetabled but one simple act of kindness will change everything. Not all change is bad and surely any change is better than just fine?

Parlour Games For Modern Families by Myfanwy Jones and Spiri Tsintziras. A trip down memory lane or, for some, a first-time experience, but perfect for these times: from rough and tumble to cards to wordplay, a compendium of games from yesteryear that will have the whole housebound family laughing.

ENERGY BOOST Sword Of Kings by Bernard Cornwell Sword-swinging Saxon warlord Uhtred of Bebbanburg returns in another fast-paced outing by Cornwell, Britain's king of historical fiction. The dry-witted warrior, of The Last Kingdom TV fame, is dragged into a vicious internal power struggle in a twisting plot that appeals to both male and female lovers of big characters and epic backdrops.

Grown Ups by Marian Keyes Irish fave Keyes is back with a brand-spanking-new bestseller that is joyful, sparkling and hopeful. Keyes brings her trademark wit to this taut and zeitgeisty family drama. Just what the world needs now.

CATCH UP The Wolf Hall trilogy by Hilary Mantel The compelling story of Thomas Cromwell, Cardinal Wolsey, Henry VIII and the political machinations and dangerous intrigue required for Henry's marriage to Anne Boleyn, told dazzlingly. Wolf Hall is the first in the trilogy - followed by Bring Up The Bodies and just-published The Mirror And The Light.

The Da Vinci Code by Dan BrownThe original page-turning masterpiece of a mystery thriller. The Louvre, an albino Catholic monk, the search for the Holy Grail, a Harvard professor, the Fibonacci sequence, a cryptographer, a safe-deposit box, a cryptex, a message written on papyrus, the tomb of Isaac Newton, Opus Dei and a conspiracy to hide the truth about Mary Magdalene. Have I left anything out?

NOSTALGIA TRIP The Chronicles Of Narnia by C.S. Lewis These books have enchanted millions of readers over the last fifty years and the magical events and characters have left many a lasting memory for adults and children alike. You may remember reading The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe, and there are six other books in the series to discover.

The Matilda Saga by Jackie French (left) Starting with A Waltz for Matilda, this is the story of our country, and a love song to our land, told by the strong women who forged a nation. What a treat.

PODCAST CALM THE FARM Oprah's SuperSoul Conversations The queen of unearthing the hacks to get through life compiles her interviews with thought gurus, wellness experts and spiritual advisers. These episodes are curated audio from her TV show SuperSoul Sunday and while you can tell it's ripped from video rather than an original podcast, it's still soothing to hear Oprah.

The Health Hacker with Adam MacDougall Footy legend turned "fitness economist", Adam MacDougall has all of the life experience and qualifications to cut through the myths and trends of the wellness and health industry. He focuses on practical solutions to exercise, food and mental health issues through his own research and talking to leaders in their field.

Energy Boost From The Newsdesk The fresh take on the stories of the day from news.com.au's Andrew Bucklow and Bronte Coy raced to the top of the podcast charts this month. They chat about the major headlines of the day and debunk the rumours around the big stories, from politics to pop culture.

Wilosophy with Wil Anderson The long-running chat podcast hosted by comedian and Gruen host has not only been entertaining but started many national conversations about mental health. Anderson's chats with fellow comedians have been heartwrenchingly revealing at times about their own struggles in life, and the Andy Lee episode about their long-running grudge was must-listen stuff.

Aunty Donna The Melbourne trio have been provoking belly laughs for several years with their fast-paced and often absurdist sketch comedy. COVID-19 isn't immune to their treatment with a recent EP titled Zach's Trip To Coles - The Musical. He has to go to Coles to "buy some dip".

Catch Up Life and Crimes with Andrew Rule One of Australia's most respected crime journalists, the Sunday Herald Sun columnist has been winning plenty of fans with his podcast investigating the bad guys of now and yesteryear. He has explored such infamous villains as the Granny Killer and hitman Neddy Smith and the more recent fraud trial of Melbourne racing identity Bill Vlahos.

Police Tape 1 Popular broadcaster Merrick Watts (below) hosts this addictive series where you can hear from investigating police officers, now off the force and on the record, as they talk about the cases that made their careers, have largely remained untold or simply made them cry. The first ep discusses the death of Michael Hutchence.

Police Tape 2: Blue Sirens Investigative journalist Natalie O'Brien reveals the stories of resilience and bravery of Australia's most remarkable women in law enforcement. The five-part series is compelling.

TV SHOWS CALM THE FARM BREEDERS STREAMING, FOXTEL ON DEMAND Ever considered suffocating your children with their own doonas? With schools looking likely to lock down, this could be you in a matter of days. Sleep-deprived and frazzled parents Paul (Martin Freeman) and Ally (Daisy Haggard) are all of us right now. If it's not the kids driving them nuts, it's parenting their parents, who have an opinion on everything, particularly planning of their deaths (sound familiar?). Enjoy this rib-tickling new British comedy with a glass of wine and maybe when the kids have gone to bed, so they don't see you laughing just a little too heartily at the parts where they share their darkest feelings about their beloved rug rats.

UPRIGHT STREAMING, FOXTEL ON DEMAND Lucky (Tim Minchin) and Meg (Milly Alcock) are two misfits whose lives literally collide on the Nullarbor track from Melbourne to Perth. He's a screw-up musician hauling more baggage than just the upright piano he's got in the back of the ute. She's a feisty teen runaway with her own secrets, but good luck getting close enough to find out what they are. It's a buddy dramedy that falls somewhere happily between The Shiralee and Last Cab To Darwin.

Energy Boost ZOEY'S EXTRAORDINARY PLAYLIST STREAMING, STAN A few days into working from home in "isolation", and bursting into song at my desk was the best it got by way of entertainment. If you need something a little more profesh than your own warbling, this feel-good series, which follows a perky young woman who hears other people's inner thoughts - except only in song and dance - is just the thing.

CHEER STREAMING, NETFLIX In the US of A, the competitive world of cheerleading is much more than just pompoms and cartwheels (it's that, but extra). This fascinating documentary takes you inside an elite squad and tells their stories of triumph over adversity, from the coach to the kids trying to use their one sporting chance in life.

CATCH UP SUCCESSION STREAMING, FOXTEL ON DEMAND This brilliant drama has had the world of media and Hollywood abuzz since it launched two seasons ago. It follows the lives of the fictional Roy family, who control one of the world's biggest media and entertainment conglomerates. When 80-year-old patriarch Logan Roy (Brian Cox) refuses to step down as CEO, a power struggle ensues. Who can, will or should succeed him? It's devilish and delicious drama.

CHERNOBYL STREAMING, FOXTEL ON DEMAND The idea of watching the story of one global crisis while another unfolds in real time may seem the act of a masochist. But we can always learn lessons from history, and this stunning miniseries captures the chaos and political manoeuvring that went on during the fallout from the nuclear meltdown at Chernobyl in 1986.

NOSTALGIA TRIP THE SOPRANOS STREAMING, FOXTEL ON DEMAND Late to The Sopranos party, I only recently binged this series for the first time and am now kicking myself for waiting so long. It's regarded as the real turning point in the golden era of today's TV dramas and, with the late James Gandolfini in the lead, it's an absolute must-watch.

THE WIRE STREAMING, FOXTEL ON DEMAND While Idris Elba settles in at home recovering from coronavirus, catch his breakout performance as Stringer Bell in this gritty five-season series.

MOVIES CALM THE FARM FROZEN 2 (PG) DISNEY+ Fresh from being crowned the highest-grossing animated movie of all time, Disney+ has rush-released this overpoweringly popular musical sequel to the streaming world. This proven crowd-pleaser doubles down on both the gleefully goofy antics and asides.

THE CHAPERONE (PG) AMAZON A delightful family-friendly affair (scripted by Downton Abbey creator Julian Fellowes) tracks Hollywood screen siren Louise Brooks' first steps on the road to fame and (mis)fortune during a tumultuous trip to New York.

CHARLOTTE'S WEB (G) FOXTEL, NETFLIX The touching story of an unlikely friendship between a naive young pig named Wilbur and a motherly older spider Charlotte. This beautiful live-action adaptation of the classic children's book by E. B. White goes best when there's minimum interference from the human cast. Kids under 10 will love every minute of it.

ENERGY BOOST FIGHTING WITH MY FAMILY (M) FOXTEL, iTunes This cheeky, scrappy-go-lucky affair is the true story of Saraya-Jade Bevis, a British pro wrestler who made a name for herself as the WWE star Paige. Interestingly, the movie is at its funniest and feistiest before Paige (played by Little Women's Florence Pugh) lands WWE legend Dwayne "The Rock" Johnson as a mentor.

SUZI Q (M)

GOOGLE, iTunes, YOUTUBE An engaging doco on the life of pioneering American rock star Suzi Quatro. The leather-clad icon herself is present as an open-hearted and honest contributor to her own story, as are family, friends, fans, a former husband and some ex-bandmates.

SPENSER CONFIDENTIAL (MA15+) NETFLIX One of the smarter dumb movies to come along in a while. Mark Wahlberg stars in the title role, an unconventional private investigator who used to be both a police officer and a prisoner behind bars. When his former boss is murdered, Spenser must crack the case to clear his own name as the prime suspect.

NOSTALGIA TRIP ONCE UPON A TIME IN HOLLYWOOD (MA15+) FOXTEL Some old-school Leo DiCaprio if you're itching for more of the baby-faced wonder after his brilliant display in Once Upon A Time In Hollywood. LDC plays a soldier of fortune in a compellingly confronting action pic set at the height of the 1999 civil war in the West African nation of Sierra Leone. Co-stars Jennifenseltown is captivating.

Maverick master Quentin Tarantino's love-letter to a long-lost Tinseltown is captivating.

BLOOD DIAMOND (MA15+) FOXTEL, NETFLIX Some old-school Leo DiCaprio if you're itching for more of the baby-faced wonder after his brilliant display in Once Upon A Time In Hollywood. LDC plays a soldier of fortune in a compellingly confronting action pic set at the height of the 1999 civil war in the West African nation of Sierra Leone. Co-stars Jennifer Connelly.

THE CONVERSATION (M) SBS ON DEMAND Francis Ford Coppola filmed this chilling ode to the death of personal privacy in 1974, between the masterpieces The Godfather Parts I and II. Gene Hackman is at his brilliant best as a sound surveillance expert who hears more than he should.

CATCH UP KNIVES OUT (M) GOOGLE, iTunes, YOUTUBE A cracking murder-mystery rife with loose ends, dead ends and one heck of an unseemly end. The show is stolen - and never returned - by a kookily amusing Daniel Craig (below). He plays an unorthodox private detective who knows all the answers from the get-go, but remains unsure of the question.

DANGER CLOSE: THE BATTLE OF LONG TAN (MA15+) FOXTEL, AMAZON The terrifying true story of The Battle of Long Tan during the Vietnam War, where 108 Australian soldiers had to hold their ground against a Vietcong almost twenty times in number.

MARRIAGE STORY (MA15+) NETFLIX In a manner often bordering on miraculous, this unsparing portrait of the contemporary divorce process showed us much more of a good time than anyone expected.

MUSIC CALM THE FARM Songs For Australia Julia Stone has assembled a spectacular cast of artists from around the world to cover some of Australia's most iconic songs to raise funds for the RFS, WildArk, Fire Sticks, Seed Mob and other bodies addressing climate change. Damien Rice's version of Sia's Chandelier will slay you while Stone's take on Midnight Oil's Beds Are Burning will both calm and fire you up.

Yo Yo Ma Get on social media and follow the celebrated cellist, who has launched a semi-regular #SongsOfComfort performance series. The legendary musician has chosen short classical pieces which help curb his anxiety, dedicating his rendition of the Sarabande from Bach's Cello Suite No.3 to healthcare workers on the front lines of the pandemic.

Energy Boost Monthly Mixtape by Zan Rowe The Double J legend curates my favourite updated playlist with everything new worth listening to from Australia and the world. It's perfect if you are keen for a one-stop shop of emerging artists such as Amber Mark and Sophomore to the latest releases from Tame Impala, The Strokes and Billie Eilish. Eclectic and electric.

After Hours by The Weeknd The big news when the seminal Canadian pop star released the tracklisting to his fourth album before it dropped on Friday was there were no featured artists. It appears he has reconnect with the power of one for this 14-track opus. He was clearly right to back himself, with introductory single Blinding Lights at No.1 in Australia for nine weeks.

Virtual concerts Keep your eye on your favourite artists' social media pages as many are staging impromptu live concerts as their own tours are cancelled due to the pandemic. Keith Urban, Chris Martin, John Legend, Yungblud and Pink are among the musicians who have already connected with their fans online and you can expect dozens more to join the livestream revolution.

Catch Up Festivals 2020 So now that you know you are missing out on your favourite festival with the mass gathering bans, support the artists who have lost their gigs by streaming a playlist featuring their tracks. Check out Bluesfest 2020, Groovin' The Moo 2020 and Download Festival 2020 playlists on streaming services and then head to the artists' pages to play more tunes and support them during the pandemic gig shutdown.

Albums 2020 There have been many excellent records so far this year and there's never enough time to immerse yourself in an artist's album universe. Take a mental health break and chuck on Tame Impala's The Slow Rush, Halsey's Manic, Selena Gomez's Rare, The Dangerous Age from Kate Ceberano, Steve Kilbey and Sean Sennett, Best Coast's Always Tomorrow, James Taylor's American Standard or Niall Horan's Heartbreak Weather.

Nostalgia Trip Songs From The South: Paul Kelly's Greatest Hits 1985-2019 As anyone who has ever seen this national treasure in concert can attest, Paul Kelly possesses a gentle yet persuasive power to unite people. His songs have a uniquely Australian voice and tell uniquely Australian stories and this collection of 43 songs run the gamut of his extensive repertoire. Maybe if we all played Paul Kelly at the same time, it could reignite the Australian spirit.

ZZ Top: That Little Ol' Band FromTexasZZ Top may be the only rock band whose line-up has remained the founding three members for 50 years. Their origins and evolution prove to be a fascinating and wholly original tale in this documentary, stretching right back to how three oddball teen bluesmen landed on their unique sound and look. Archival footage shows guitarist Billy Gibbons and bassist Dusty Hill without the trademark beards.

1999 by Prince (Super Deluxe) This may have slipped under your radar as it came out in late November. There was a physical box set going for $400 but you can also take the streaming route and enjoy 65 songs - the final recorded versions, demos and live cuts - when you have a spare five hours and 53 minutes.

FOR MORE LISTINGSDAiLYTELEGRAPH.com.au