THE NRL 'RATBAG' FROM ROCKHAMPTON NOW HAS A BUSINESS EMPIRE

IT'S a rags-to-riches tale of a "rat bag" teenager from Rockhampton who has morphed into a business-savvy millionaire at the Melbourne Storm.

Welcome Cameron Munster Inc.

Four years ago, Munster's rugby league career was at the crossroads, the Storm ace kicked out of Australia's World Cup squad by Mal Meninga following an alcohol-fuelled pub spat that sent to Melbourne for crisis talks with Craig Bellamy.

The Storm super coach laid it on the line. In typical Bellamy style, no punches were pulled. He told Munster to wake up and get off the booze … or get out of the Melbourne Storm.

Fast forward to March 2021 and Munster has become a juggernaut - on and off the field. He is the king of Queensland rugby league after winning the Wally Lewis Medal for his matchwinning magic in piloting the Maroons to a boilover of the Blues in last year's Origin series triumph.

Munster's on-field transformation has triggered an off-field revolution that had him branch out into property investment and business ventures, rubbing shoulders with Queensland's most powerful people.

He has a direct line to Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk, who was impressed with him after a chance meeting at a restaurant last year Over the past 12 months, Munster has realised he needs to get serious about planning for life after football.

The COVID-19 crisis last year, which put the NRL premiership on ice for three months, forced every well-paid player to face their mortality in the sport.

Munster, on $900,000 this season, isn't about to go broke anytime soon. But he will if he doesn't use his money wisely.

"I started studying a Certificate IV in Business last year when COVID hit," Munster said. "As an NRL player, you aren't in this game for long. I've had to learn the hard way. As a teenager at the Storm, I thought this is going to last forever. I was always the youngest bloke in the team and suddenly I'm almost the oldest guy (26) in the team.

"I'm getting to my 30s. I've nearly been at Melbourne for 10 years. "In the last year or so, I've watched a few of my teammates at the Storm who have developed their own business ideas and I thought I've reached a stage of my career where I have to start thinking of a life beyond football.

"If I can set a platform for myself now, I can find some stability for myself when I retire from footy." His manager Shaun Pyne added, succinctly: "The ratbag has turned himself into a businessman." The first step for Munster was purchasing his first home in Melbourne, which piqued his interest in other commercial opportunities.

Suddenly, Munster is whipping himself up into a corporate tsunami. He has sponsorship deals with Puma and Musashi and is about to release a product range from shirts and caps to alcoholic ginger beer.

Working with Terella Brewing, he has an ownership stake in a ginger-infused brew coined Mad Dog, a tribute to his nickname at the Storm.

There is an alcohol-free version for kids called Drop Kick, which will be released in school tuck shops across Australia, and he has signed on as an ambassador for a number of charities in the mental-health space.

"I am excited about launching some of these products," he said. "I'm interested in business and investment.

"Making that first investment to get my home made me think about other ventures I could be involved in." Working with Ringers Western, Munster has also devised his own casual clothing range.

"I wouldn't call myself book smart but I believe I network well with people," Munster said. "By nature, I love having a yarn with people and having a joke. "I don't consider myself to be -better than anyone."