Saving one iconic ferry not enough Wow, what a waste.

Only one of the Freshwater-class Manly ferries is to retained - for weekends and public holidays (Safe harbour for old dame, 28/11).

So, in the so-called wisdom of the NSW Coalition government, they are wasting million of dollars for new faster boats - a saving of a mere eight minutes in travel time.

Why would you want to save eight minutes on one of the most beautiful harbours in the world?

And on a beautiful ferry that is part of Australian history. If it was an old fibro house it would likely be heritage listed. Glenn O'Sullivan, Kanwal

There's another side to this cut-price debate It's a funny thing when you compare consumer goods from other countries on sale in Australia - the Chinese product is nearly always cheaper (hundreds of dollars on some products) than other brands from other countries (China's whines hurting our wines, 28/11)?

Excuse my doubts, but are Chinese state-owned companies dumping product into our market? Heaven forbid that the Chinese Communist Party might even be thinking of that?

It's about time we placed our own tariffs on Chinese-made products at the same rate as inflicted on our wine industry and others.

Let's see how their quality stands up on a level playing field? I bet sales would decline dramatically.

Brad Probert, Woodlands

Big stick of cruel regime It is just pure vindictiveness that sees the Chinese government wanting to dictate a list of terms for Australia to comply with after our government wanted an inquiry into the origins of COVID -19, which started in China (China's whines hurting our wines, 28/11).

Now they are out to punish Australia with a big financial hit to our economy with bans and duties on our products.

There's a ridiculous 212 per cent tariff on our wine and 50 ships with Australian coal kept at sea and not allowed in ports to unload under the lie that our coal quality is not good.

But of course it's all about Australia calling out China's total disregard for human rights, as have many countries, but it seems we have come in for special treatment.

Now we are seeing the true face of communism in a country run by brutal despots who had no qualms about killing thousands of young students in Tiananmen Square and are now using the big stick on Australia.

Robert Livingstone, Alexandria

Licence rules' grey area The husband of a young mother who was killed after a 90-year-old drove into her has said there need to be tougher laws for elderly drivers (Get killer elderly drivers off the road, 27/11).

The young mother had been sitting with friends outside a North Epping cafe when she was struck.

There have been recent campaigns for a crackdown on the assessment of older drivers.

A major problem exists as there is no national standard when it comes to assessing the competency of aged drivers.

Victoria doesn't require drivers to pass a license test when they reach a certain age, instead the onus is on drivers to decide when they need to reduce or stop driving.

The elderly value the freedom of having a driver's licence and are very often loath to stop driving.

The need for a national standard for assessing drivers over 65 has been in the too-hard basket long enough.

Peter Penglis, Kambah, ACT

Beware more car horrors Yet another report of the death of a toddler left in a hot car (Girl dies after being left in hot car, 28/11).

I can't imagine the suffering this little one endured.

It is a timely warning to all - don't leave kids in cars. It's an Australian summer, let's not lose another precious little life.

Marg Swindells, Castle Hill

Justice suspended The Victorian County Court is sending the wrong message (Thieving union boss spared prison, 27/11).

For someone who has stolen more than $100,000 from hardworking health workers/union members not to be given a custodial sentence is just wrong.

This person has stolen money from union members and used it on trips overseas to London, Paris and the US, and paid off debts for family members while the union members performed their difficult and often unpleasant tasks. Go figure.

I wonder if I stole $100,000 from my employer, would I get a suspended sentence? Ian Field, Wagga Wagga

COVID rules roasted I attended a local club last Thursday evening for my regular "roast of the day" dinner.

I couldn't get in the door because the club had reached its one person per four square metres capacity (Cabinet's space split, 27/11).

And it will be a lot worse in the summer holidays.

The COVID police may need to attend to break up fights with frustrated holiday makers looking to spend money, but not being able to find somewhere to do so.

Jim Andrews, Ballina

Agony of the army parent I have to thank Joel Fitzgibbon for his very enlightening opinion piece about our troops (Where did it go wrong - Opinion, 27/11).

Although not in the SAS, our son served in Afghanistan and I have to say it was the longest 10 months in our lives.

Some short phone calls from him in the middle of the night were the only contact we had.

Whenever there was a press release that one of our troops had been killed our immediate thoughts and prayers were for the family of the lost soldier as we knew they had already received that "knock on the door" that no parent wants.

John Stuart, St Fillans

When the halo slips While Gladys Berejiklian has proven to be the best premier during the pandemic, her "halo" has slipped a bit in recent times.

I don't hold her dalliance with "dodgy Daryl" against her, in fact it humanises her a bit, but her recent slip-up on not quarantining following a coronavirus test, her "pork barrelling" comments and her war of words with a fellow premier show lack of judgment.

But worst of all, her government has turned "green", which was not on the voters' radar prior to last year's election.

Janice Russell, Malua Bay

Thunder enlightening Yes the Sydney Thunder vs Melbourne Stars 2020 WBBL final was anti-climatic in a way, but this should not divert attention away from what has been a riveting tournament played out by some of the most accomplished female cricketers in the world, the majority of them homegrown Australia talent.

Congratulations to the winning Sydney Thunder team and commiserations to the Melbourne Stars, who lost the final but were the best team for most of the tournament.

Eric Palm, Gympie, Queensland

Briefly … So sick of this Chinese communist dictatorship trying to make Australia another Hong Kong (China's whines hurting our wines, 28/11). Tear up the trade deal, stop all iron ore exports and let China shop elsewhere.

Dazza, Singleton "" " Good on you, James Graham. A fitting way to end a great career (Graham goes out a winner after last-gasp final drama, 29/11).

Peter Wilcox, Blayney "" " Why is it we are told to cough into our elbows, then to greet folk with an elbow tap?

Troy Henry, Long Flat "" " It fails the pub test when a small, stubborn minority of anti-vaxxers may keep the virus alive when the COVID vaccine is available (Need to deny anti-vax push - editorial, 28/11). It is a commonsense case of no one is safe until everyone is safe.

Steve Ngeow, Chatswood "" " So Joe Hildebrand reckons Albo's on the right track (Opinion, 28/11). Yeah, a dead end.

George Day, Old Bar

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001