DESPITE the long shadow COVID-19 cast this year, not everything in 2020 was doom and gloom. In fact there have been many significant medical advances, good news stories and miraculous rescues which offered welcome patches of light amid a dark pandemic.

In July, the quick-thinking actions of three police officers at Casula made all the difference to two toddler cousins found unconscious in a backyard pool. Members of the Al-Achrafe family desperately tried to revive little Destiny and Osman, both aged two, but the children weren't breathing and there was no pulse.

But police officers, Sergeant Mick McClafferty, Senior Constable Peter Heginbotham and Senior Constable Victor Suarez, arrived in time and began performing CPR and kept the pair alive until the paramedics came and took them to hospital. Even then, the tots had to be put in a coma and it took a week until they received the all-clear.

In June, Australians rejoiced when missing autistic teen William Callaghan, 14, was found safe and well after three days in freezing temperatures in Victorian bush known as Mount Disappointment - later to be dubbed Mount Miracle.

Another child lucky to be alive is three-year-old Ayda Gezgin, found in the wreckage of her apartment 90 hours after an earthquake struck Turkey. And another three-year-old, Elif Perincek, was also miraculously rescued after three days.

While 2020 has been a horrific year for shark attacks - the eight deaths to date are the most in nearly a century - some have been lucky to escape with their lives. In early Dec-ember, surfer Dion Lynch was bitten by a great white in South Australia and had to swim back to shore despite "catastrophic" lacerations to his back and walk another 300m to get help.

"The stars aligned for this gentleman," paramedic Michael Rushby said. It wasn't such a lucky escape for a trio of baboons who broke out of a truck on the way to Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, where a male in the group was scheduled for a vasectomy.

The 15-year-old male and his two female companions casually strolled around the Sydney hospital, seemingly oblivious to puzzled bystanders and medical workers, before they were eventually wrangled by police officers and animal experts.

"I'm at RPA ... there were three baboons in the carpark," one witness told 2GB. "They even had shiny red bottoms." In more scientific news, researchers at James Cook University made a- -breakthrough which could lead to an early diagnostic test for Alzheimer's, with the same techniques used to study the -origins of the moon. They used mass spectrometry, normally used to analyse meteorites and lunar rocks, to compare brains of those with the disease and healthy brains.

Another positive story this year was the -release of Australian academic Kylie Moore-Gilbert from an Iranian jail after being locked up for two years.

And last week it was the "Christmas Miracle" wombat - found alive in its dead mother's pouch. The wombat, Holly, now lives at the Australian Reptile Park after being rescued when her mum was killed by a car.

The miracle kids Izmir quake survivor Elif Perincek after being pulled from the rubble in the quake in Turkey and (right) in hospital.

Lifesaving CPR Destiny Shrief with Senior Constable Peter Heginbotham, who gave her CPR after she was pulled from a pool.

Teen found Missing teenager William Callaghan was found alive in rugged Victorian bushland.

Shark survivor Dion Lynch was bitten off Kangaroo Island.

Baboons escape The baboons at RPA Hospital. Picture: Seven

Wombat saved Holly was saved from her dead mum's pouch.

Aussie freed in Iran Kylie Moore-Gilbert as a free woman.