PARRAMATTA EELS V BRISBANE BRONCOS 7.50PM TONIGHT

FOOTY'S finally back and so are the fans - all 300 million of them watching in loungerooms around the world.

In what will be a watershed moment for rugby league, the NRL's stunning eight-game return over the next four days is set to be watched by a -record global TV audience of 300 million sport-starved people- in what is expected to be the largest TV ratings for a single round in the sport's 112-year history.

Industry insiders predict about 30 to 40 million people around the world would tune in to each bone-rattling match over the next four days as rugby league becomes the first football code in the -English-speaking world to -return to the playing fields and TV.

NRL matches will be shown in more than 70 countries, including the US, France, Britain, Papua New Guinea and Uganda.

At 7.50pm tonight when Brisbane and Parramatta kick off at Suncorp Stadium, rugby league will become just the third major sporting league in the world, along with football's K League in South Korea and Germany's Bundesliga, to resume post COVID-19.

Matches will also be shown in such far-flung countries as Nauru, Angola and The Netherlands-. Some countries have aired NRL games in recent years but matches have already been promoted heavily this week.

'UNIQUE OPPORTUNITY' The increase in viewership could not be accurately predicted but insiders believe it could be by as much as 40 to 50 per cent.

"There's certainly a unique opportunity to attract new fans to our game globally," acting NRL CEO Andrew Abdo said.

"While it has been the loyalty- of our fans here at home that has been driving us to resume the season, we will be one of only a few live sports around the world that will be playing in June and July.

"We know fans are craving live sport so we're excited about the global audience we could attract with the resumption of the competition and the exposure that will bring to our corporate partners.

"We are also expecting a strong take-up of the Watch NRL app which allows fans to stream games live throughout the world. It's a credit to our chairman Peter V'landys and the commission for their unwavering commitment to bring the game back on May 28." NRL officials hope to gain a slice of the massive US sports market during the shutdown of major codes including the NBA, and have already seen a spike in media interest. An article- on forbes.com this week was headlined: "Americans, this is why the NRL should be your new favourite sport." "Rugby league is the lesser-known but infinitely superior form of rugby and, if you like your sport high-octane, occasionally- violent, endlessly authentic and frequently spectacular, then you need to tune in this Thursday for National- Rugby League," it read.

"Rugby league is like watching the NFL, except after every down they immediately have to get up and do it again, with no break, and nobody wears padding."

A SIGNIFICANT SPIKE Ratings in coronavirus-hit England are also expected to spike significantly with Super League yet to recommence.

"About 80 to 90 million people would have access to the games in America and Europe-, maybe more," a TV source said. "From that you have to ask yourself how many would watch it.

"Many may not understand the game but they are craving live sport around the world right now.

"Australians are watching the Bundesliga. Why? Because it's the only live sport being shown. I would imagine about 30 to 40 million people would watch each game for longer than 15 minutes.

"That would be equivalent to watching one quarter of an NFL match. "Way back in 2011, State of Origin and the NRL grand final reached 40 million households in the US and 48 million through Europe.

"They might not come back when their preferred sport returns but, this weekend, they will be watching." The NRL has jumped back first ahead of the AFL and is the first sport to be played since March 23.

Despite the hype, Nine and Fox are reluctant to predict their NRL ratings in Australia for this round for fear they may fall short.

While fans will tune in, broadcasters will still have a challenge ahead to create the game-day atmosphere without supporters in the stands.

'GREAT TO BE BACK' Sydney Roosters coach Trent Robinson said ravenous sports fans around the world would tune into rugby league.

"There has been a lot of work from the NRL to get back on and we want to represent- our game well in some clear air space around the world," said Robinson.

"There has been some interest around rugby league from friends who live overseas. It will be good to get our game back on represented the right way. It's great to be back.

"We want to represent rugby league and there's no better game for us than Friday night's match against Souths to restart the season." Former NSW skipper and coach Laurie Daley knows the NRL cannot miss a wonderful opportunity: "This is a great chance to showcase our game to so many countries. We have known how great our game has been for years but now it's time for others to find out."

CANADA Despite trailing behind rugby, Canada has enjoyed a rugby league revival since 2010 thanks to the inclusion of the former NRL star-studded Toronto Wolfpack in the Super League competition BROADCASTER: ROGER SPORTS NET

IRELAND Ireland boasts a World Cup league team still growing in strength, as evidenced by their solid 2017 showing.

BROADCASTER: Fox Sports

FRANCE In much the same way as Canada, French league has made major inroads after the UK Super League's addition of the Catalans Dragons. BROADCASTER: BeIN Sports

USA League has had sporadic outings in the US, including the 1987 State of Origin in Long Beach and the 2018 Rugby League International Challenge between New Zealand and England in Denver. That match drew 19,320 fans but US viewers for tonight's game are expected to eclipse that figure by a long way. BROADCASTER: Fox Sports

UK The UK is currently a league powerhouse with the English Super League, but with the world's second-strongest comp still on hold amid the coronavirus crisis expect a massive spike in Brits tuning in for the NRL relaunch.

BROADCASTER: Skysports

AFRICA To be shown in 48 countries including Angola, Botswana, Congo Democratic Republic, Senegal, South Africa and Swaziland Despite being overshadowed slightly by South Africa's massive rugby union standing, French influence has led to the 13-man game flourishing in Gambia, Morocco, Nigeria and Ghana.

BROADCASTER: Fox Sports

PNG The home of the Kumuls boasts some of the most frenzied footy supporters in the world, with their strengthening national team bolstered by the PNG Hunters' inclusion in the Intrust Super Cup.

BROADCASTER: Digicel/SKY Pacific/ TVWAN - Digicel TV

SAMOA Another growing Pacific powerhouse, Samoa has long boasted a number of NRL and Super League players, such as Bronco Anthony Milford and Eel Junior Paulo, who will both face off against each other in tonight's season relaunch opener.

BROADCASTER: TV3/Sky Pacific

TONGA The tiny Polynesian country is punching well above its weight with a new wave of passionate fans, following the dizzying rise of the star-studded national team, the Mate Ma'a, who have now beaten all top tier countries, including Australia.

BROADCASTER: Digicel/Sky Pacific

FIJI Possibly only behind PNG in terms of passionate supporters, Fiji is also known as nursery for some of the NRL's biggest stars, such as Maika Sivo and Semi Radradra.

BROADCASTER: Fiji Broadcasting Corporation/Sky Pacific NRL also showing in: Cook Islands, Kiribati, Nauru, Niue, American Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, Vanuatu and Micronesia.

NEW ZEALAND Warriors fans may have had little to cheer about in recent years, but league fans across the ditch will still be able to take in the considerable Kiwi talent scattered across the rest of the NRL from tonight.

BROADCASTER: Sky Pacific

INFLIGHT/INSHIP Worldwide - excluding Australia, NZ and Pacific Islands BROADCASTER: Sport 24 STREAMING COVERAGE: Worldwide except for Australia, New Zealand & Pacific Islands