Company director Charles Fairfax and his wife, Kate have bought their COVID-19 retreat, Balquhain at Blackheath. The historic Blue Mountains home was the little used weekender of the fund manager Alwyn Heong and his partner Ian Newtown.

While not one of the treasured colonial homes of the media family, Balquhain was briefly owned by Charles's uncle John B. Fairfax for a decade from 1980, and the venue of many family tennis parties.

Michael Pallier at -Sotheby's International, along with local agent Brenden Purcell, are understood to have -secured higher than its initial $3.8 million hopes, after just a week on the market. The Dover Heights based Fairfax (inset) spotted the advertisement in the Wentworth Courier. Balquhain last sold for $2.3 million in 2011, after three years on the market.

The heritage-listed 1890s home was built by the grazier, Malcolm Campbell as a holiday home from his base, St Helliers near Muswellbrook.  It was then owned by the Leslie family whose origins were back in Scotland, where they owned the tower of Balquhain near Aberdeen. They bequeathed the home to be used as a rest centre for Presbyterian ministers, with the church selling for $76,000 in 1980 to the Fairfax family who onsold it in 1990 for $675,000. Heong resides at Headingley House, the Georgian Woollahra home bought for $13 million in 2013 from John Spender QC then making the move from the Rose Bay trophy home Indah which Pallier secured a $27.08 million in 2015.

With retreats away from the city attracting increased attention due to the pan-demic, strong interest is also expected for Sentry Rock, the Hawkesbury River ranch style retreat listed by Louise Cordina, who runs Cordina Farms, and her horseman husband Glenn North.

It was built at Spencer by the late stockbroker Rene Rivkin in a rustic style and then expanded by Bob and Wendy Lapointe who paid $1.9 million in 2005. Cordina and North paid $4.5 million in 2017 for the 4ha retreat that has $10 million plus hopes through Trent Iverson of Harris Iverson Real Estate. Rivkin would either fly or boat to the riverfront some 60km northwest of Sydney.