DIPLOMACY ON THE MENU

A SENIOR Chinese diplomat has claimed COVID-19 may not have originated in Wuhan, accused Australia of "whining" about Beijing's influence and denied it is using "bullying" trade tactics.

In a rare public appearance, deputy head of mission at the Chinese Embassy Minister Wang Xining acknowledged the coronavirus was first "identified" and "reported" in Wuhan, but that did not mean it was the source.

"I think it is up to the -scientists to find out the origin, and also how it has been dealt with by different governments," he said.

Mr Wang described Australia's proposal for an independent inquiry into the coronavirus pandemic as "shocking" and claimed it "hurts the feelings" of Chinese people.

The top Chinese diplomat was served up a meal of Australian beef and barley with a side of red wine ahead of his speech at the National Press Club in Canberra Wednesday - a not so subtle reference to the three sectors Beijing has targeted in its escalating trade war. But he dismissed suggestions Australia was being "targeted" with trade sanctions due to its pursuit of a COVID-19 -inquiry, saying the recent launch  of an investigation into wine was not  a -"coercive move" by the Chin-ese Government.

Mr Wang also defended China's controversial programs, including Confucius -Institutes and the Belt and Road Initiative, warning Australia would not "enjoy today's economic affluence, cultural diversity and intellectual richness" without "accepting some foreign influence".

"I think people are smart enough to decide what influence is good and worth considering and what is bad and must be fended off," he said.

"It won't affect Australians' own choice of your political and social structure, I don't see any reason for whining about your constitutional -fragility and your intellectual vulnerability." Mr Wang also said China "respects the traditional relationship" between Australia and the US, acknowledging their share history during the war.

"To have an alliance is not a problem," he said. But he indicated there was a problem if Australia turned on a "a third party with the strength of that alliance" with the US.

In his speech Mr Wang said Australia and China may "disagree on some issues" but the partnership will not be "wrecked" as long as goodwill was presented.

Mr Wang conceded it was "no easy task" to keep a partnership in "good shape". "It takes concerted determination and joint effort to make it thrive," he said. "A married couple knows this," he said.

"While a rift between husband and wife hurts one family, a rift between two countries hurts millions." Liberal MP Dave Sharma told The Daily Telegraph it was "inconsistent" of China to "carry on about their own feelings" while accusing Australia of "whining".

"I don't consider us standing up for Australian interests as whining," he said. Mr Sharma said China was not doing itself any favours by trying to spread "alternative theories" about the source of COVID-19.

"I think it discredits China, a country that has aspirations to global leadership," he said.

Mr Sharma said Australian ministers had been "very upfront" about their desire to speak with Chinese counterparts labelling Mr Wang's claims the lack of communication was only due to protocol was "disingenuous".

"I welcome his calls for a constructive, forward looking relationship, but obviously to have that you end to be prepared to talk to one another." Acting Chief Medical Officer Professor Paul Kelly said the Australian government was "very interested" in the -origins of COVID-19 to ensure lessons can be learned for -future pandemics.

"We know that the first cases reported … came from Wuhan," he said. University of Sydney foreign relations expert Professor James Curran told The Daily Telegraph the overall tone of Mr Wang's speech indicated a "significant" shift away from the aggressive language deployed by Chinese officials in recent months. "We may well be seeing the beginning of a thaw to the deep freeze into which Beijing has put (our) relationship," he said.