SIMPLY Your Best.

The pressure has been applied to a fragile Queensland now that the bookies and NSW coach Brad Fittler have declared the Maroons will need one of their greatest performances to overcome the Blues.

"I get the impression that Queensland will need to be at their best (to beat us)," Fittler said. "I feel like our blokes, they're ready, they're strong." The city of Adelaide will host State of Origin for the first time on Wednesday night -before a COVID-19-restricted crowd of 26,500 that is set to -attend Adelaide Oval.

And on a night of records, including the first Origin match to be played in November, -Fittler's belief in his Blues to take a 1-0 series lead is backed up by the revelation NSW will start the shortest price to win an Origin in TAB -history.

The Blues' $1.33 head-to-head price to beat the Maroons is the shortest for an Origin game since TAB offered sports betting in 1998.

The Maroons, who have injury concerns over centre -Brenko Lee and utility Kurt Capewell, are friendless at $3.30.

The Blues are also a record-low $1.25 to win the series, while the Cane Toads of veteran coach Wayne Bennett have been installed at $4.

An unlikely win for the Maroons, who will be without a host of stars due to injury and suspension - including Michael Morgan, Valentine Holmes, Kalyn Ponga and Kyle Feldt - as well as Josh McGuire (overlooked), would be one of Origin's greatest upsets.

The Maroons will have at least seven players on debut, their most since game one in 2006. The Blues will have three CONTINUED PAGE 72 FROM BACK PAGE debutants, including right centre Clint Gutherson, five-eighth Luke Keary and front-rower Junior Paulo.

Fittler was certain that given his major influence on the team, Keary was ready to steer the Blues, who will combine with Nathan Cleary for the first time in Origin.

"Luke Keary has obviously been with the Roosters and they have had some big games over the last couple of years," Fittler said. "He's a courageous player. He backs himself. That's the courage you like as a coach." Shield holders the Blues are attempting to win their third consecutive series for just the second time in 40 years of Origin football.

Fittler is aiming to become just the second NSW coach to claim the treble behind Phil Gould, who did so from 1992-94.

The NSW coach understands that nothing is certain when it comes to winning Origin matches and he respects -Bennett's ability to have the Maroons ready for a boilover.

"All I know is they will be ready," -Fittler said.

"When I look at their team I just assume every player is going to have their best game.

"I feel like they will play as a team and will be spirited.

"That's all we can bank on and that's all we can prepare for." Given the strain of the past season and Origin's placement in November, Fittler answered matter-of-factly when asked if his players could struggle to find their rhythm from the kick-off.

"I don't get that impression," he said. The Blues' hit-and-run mission includes flying via charter plane to Adelaide on Wednesday morning before returning to Sydney after the match.