* Shock Broncos twist * Green: No player split * Kent: Strange days

OUSTED North Queensland coach Paul Green's close friendship with powerful Brisbane Broncos board member Darren Lockyer could be key in the race to replace Anthony Seibold.

Ahead of Brisbane's annual general meeting on Tuesday, it can be revealed that Green has been catapulted to the top of the Broncos' coaching hit-list alongside Kevin Walters.

Green also has a solid and longstanding friendship with Ben Ikin, a leading contender to take over from Paul White as Broncos chief executive. Ikin was on the Cowboys' board when Green was handed the job following Neil Henry's sacking in 2013.

Green is understood to have received a significant payout - close to $1 million - to make his exit from Townsville with a season-and-a-half to run on his contract.

His departure means the Cowboys are also on the lookout for a new head coach, and Josh Hannay will take over for the interim. Anthony Griffin, Kristian Woolf, Nathan Brown, Walters and Green's former assistants David Fairleigh and Todd Payten have been mentioned, although the Cowboys have had no discussions with outside coaches.

That hunt is expected to start immediately following Friday night's showdown with Manly.

But the timing for Green could not be more ideal given Seibold is considered a dead man walking.

Stephen Kearney's former job at the New Zealand Warriors is also up for grabs, while Green's name was being pushed at Cronulla earlier this year.

It was also suggested that Green could take Walters' Queensland Origin job if Walters replaced Seibold.

It now seems to be a matter of when, not if, the Broncos board will pull the trigger on Seibold.

The Broncos board is preparing for a huge backlash at Tuesday's CONTINUED PAGE 51 FROM BACK PAGE AGM, which will be done via video link because of COVID-19 restrictions. But there will be no escaping the reality and angry shareholders are expected to demand answers on the coaching front, as well as what is being done to stem the bleeding at a once proud club that has hit an all-time low.

While the Broncos' board has tried desperately to give Seibold as much support as possible, the reality is the 48-0 loss to Wests Tigers last Friday night has basically made his position untenable.

The greater fear now is that if the Tigers could do what they did to the Broncos last week, Friday's clash against Melbourne threatens to end in a cricket score.

Enter Green, who has had a strong desire to coach the Broncos since he worked under Wayne Bennett a decade ago.

Green also played a handful of games at the club, while he won premierships with Wynnum Manly.

Until this point, Walters (pictured) was viewed as the man most likely to take over from Seibold because of his proud Broncos history.

While Walters has no experience as an NRL head coach, he is the Maroons' -Origin coach and adored at every level of Queensland rugby league. He would pull together the angry club legends as well as the fans.

In Green's favour is his close relationship with people of influence, while his -coaching record is also pretty outstanding.

Green's highlight in six-and-a-half years at the Cowboys was beating the Broncos to win the 2015 premiership, although his effort to take the club to the 2017 grand final without Johnathan Thurston was also a huge coaching achievement.

"I'll take some time, take a break and clear my head, and then decide what's next," Green said on Monday.

"Whilst my time coaching the Cowboys has come to an end, my time as a head coach has not, so I'll be looking for an opportunity at some stage." Green's problems at the Cowboys had been dragging on for some time as his relationship with some senior players deteriorated.

A blazing row with Michael Morgan following a match in Newcastle last year while on a night out was considered a -tipping point.

Green is known to have an extremely smart footy brain and a wonderful coaching ability, but his man-management skills have been known to let him down.

It just got to the stage at the Cowboys where both parties needed a fresh start, although the -parting was done with immense respect.

It is understood Green and club chairman Lewis Ramsay spoke last Wednesday following the 42-16 loss to the Sydney Roosters and it was decided Green would not be coaching the Cowboys next year.

That was followed by another conversation last Friday when Ramsay and Green agreed the game against -Penrith would be Green's last at the club.

But only board members and senior management were aware of the situation. The players were told on Sunday night they would be required for an 11am meeting on Monday, where Green told them he was moving on.