Cordner says players ready for isolation KANGAROOS stars Boyd Cordner and Cameron Murray have thrown their heavyweight support behind Project Apollo, convinced rugby league's biggest names will lockdown immediately if it means resurrecting the code.

With ARLC chairman Peter V'landys wanting to restart the NRL season by June, both Cordner and Murray have told The Saturday Telegraph that Australian Test players will do "whatever it takes" to assist in the bold comeback plan.

Already, the newly-formed NRL innovation committee has been tasked with reviving the competition within the next eight weeks, even if it means putting all 16 clubs into quarantine.

Another option is restarting with a State of Origin series, with potential lockdown zones including Sydney Olympic Park, the Queensland town of Gladstone, or even a remote -island in the Pacific Ocean.

CONTINUED PAGE 93 FROM BACK PAGE Asked about going into lockdown so that rugby league could restart during the COVID-19 pandemic, Cordner said: "As players, we need to do whatever it takes. And if going into isolation is required by the game to get things started again, I'm sure that's what we'll do.

"We've seen what the Warriors were prepared to do, and then what they did over a couple of weeks to keep the NRL running. And as rugby league players, this is what we do … we want to play." While the Roosters' superstar added that isolating for weeks, and potentially months, would be difficult for some NRL players - "especially those with large families" - he stressed the sacrifice would be worth it.

"Obviously a lot of guys are at different stages in their lives," Cordner said. "Some are young, single and would have no problem going into isolation. Others though, have big families and obviously it's going to be a lot more difficult for them. But at the same time, I think every player realises we wouldn't have the lives we do without rugby league. So you have to do everything possible to get back to the game." South Sydney star Murray agreed.

"Personally, I'm happy to do whatever it takes to start playing again," he said. "As long as it can be done in a safe environment that's approved by health professionals, I'm ready to go.

"Not only from a selfish point of view, because I'd love to be playing again, but also for the wider community. I think this issue is far bigger than just footballers getting paid again.

"Rugby league is an important part of Australian culture and I'll do whatever I can to get it going again." Currently, an eight-member committee led by ARL commissioner Wayne Pearce is working out ways to construct an environment where the NRL competition can resume while still ensuring the safety of its players.

Dubbed "Project Apollo", the push involves a range of scenarios that include having all 16 clubs together in quarantine, having teams separated into conferences or evenisolating clubs across NSW and Queensland.Asked when he thought the NRL season would resume, and how it might look, Cordner said: "Right now, that's a hard one to answer. Will we play a full season? I don't know. I'd like to think there's a chance but I'm guessing it will more likely be a modified competition."