Why it was more important to demonise anyone who agreed with Donald Trump's theory the virus came from a lab than to actually investigate whether he was right

Wait a second, this wasn't supposed to happen. We were all supposed to believe that the COVID-19 pandemic just sort of happened when someone slaughtered the wrong -animal too close to some other animal in Wuhan's notoriously gruesome "wet markets".

The idea that it may have been cooked up in a lab, even for legitimate purposes? The stuff of internet -loonies, we were told.

Yet how things change.

Evidence is now building that in fact the coronavirus was cooked up in the Wuhan Institute of Virology, with the idea now being endorsed by US deputy national security adviser -Michael Pottinger saying that there was "a growing body of evidence that the lab is likely the most credible source of the virus" - and that in -Beijing, "even establishment figures … have openly dismissed the wet market story".

This lends credence to the theory that the virus may have been created at the lab as part of legitimate scientific research that aims to cut up and recombine viruses in what are known as "gain of function" experiments -designed to predict how viruses might evolve - and thus better counter their threat should that occur.

But it's dangerous work. In 2014 a paper by scientists at Johns Hopkins University in the US called for a moratorium on such experiments, saying that "research that aims to create new potential pandemic pathogens … poses extraordinary potential risks to the public." You don't say.

Now, like the credibility of doctors who used to advertise cigarettes, the preferred media narrative that no way could the coronavirus have slipped through the gates at the Wuhan -Institute of Virology is falling apart.

And it hasn't been helped by China's response, blocking a World Health Organisation team from landing in Wuhan to investigate the pandemic's origins.

As the possibility that the pandemic is China's own Chernobyl, it's worthwhile looking back at just how this theory of COVID-19's origins has been dealt with in the leftist media.

After all, the idea that the virus -escaped some lab where these things were being tinkered with, for whatever purpose, was popular with Trump and his supporters, making it automatically suspect.

Recall that before the latest round of trade sanctions and social media attacks, hawkishness on China was seen as a thing for the sabre-rattling right.

For the respectable left, it was far better to treat the coronavirus as the natural but unfortunate outcome of Wuhan's exotic local food scene and make anyone who said otherwise out to be a war-hawk or a pariah.

To blame the communist state which, after all, was supposed to make us all wealthy while providing a counterbalance to a blustering America was unthinkable.

The ABC, naturally, led the charge to depict those who thought something fishy (or even batty, pardon the pun) was going on at the Wuhan -Institute of Virology as a swivel-eyed lunatic or, even worse, a Trump supporter. "Coronavirus may have come from a Chinese lab, if you believe -Donald Trump - but experts disagree", sneered the headline on a piece by reporter Alan Weedon on April 18 of last year.

Ah yes, where would we be without "experts"?

A month later, after Sharri Mark-son reported for the The Daily Telegraph that a US State Department dossier suggested links between the coronavirus outbreak and the Chinese facility, the ABC again swept into action to shoot the story down.

"The document contained no new evidence linking the laboratory to the outbreak and instead relied on publicly available news and scientific journal papers," the ABC's Dylan Welch wrote.

Not to be outdone, the ABC's Media Watch did not one but two hit pieces, one week apart, slamming the story as a "conspiracy theory" and -citing condemnations of the reporting by everyone from Gareth Evans to Bob Carr.

The same pattern was repeated in leftward-listing newsrooms around the world where for the past four years Donald Trump has been Enemy Number One.

The Los Angeles Times told readers in May that "Like the virus whose origin it purports to explain, the following conjecture refuses to die: The novel coronavirus was cooked up in a Chinese lab." A Washington Post "fact check" (yes, really) that same month looked at the question "Was the Wuhan coronavirus accidentally released from a Wuhan lab?" and came up with the answer "It's doubtful".

This, as they say, is not journalism. It's activism in plain sight, stemming from the simple equation that has governed so much of the news cycle for the past four years: If Trump says X, then not only must that X be false, it also must be driven into the ground and the earth above it salted so that nothing ever grows there again.

And it is pretty rich to see the ABC of all outlets getting all high and mighty about "conspiracy theories".

Recall that the billion-dollar broadcaster spent wheelbarrows of cash pushing the greatest conspiracy theory of all (still taken as an article of faith by many on the left), namely, that Donald Trump was somehow an agent of Moscow.

This saw taxpayers fork out for everything from the "Russia, Are You Listening?" podcast to special three-part Four Corners humbly titled, "The Story of the Century".

The great irony, of course, is that those on the left love to pride themselves on listening to facts and -experts and what is pretentiously known as "the science", while at the same time judging every piece of information's worth by whether or not it serves their narrative.

There is nothing political about a lab accident; they might happen anywhere scientists are working with these sorts of viruses. But there something deeply political, to say nothing of incredibly dangerous, about dismissing that possibility simply because it might vindicate the US president.