THE COVID FILES CORONAVIRUS cases across the world could have been cut by 95 per cent if China had come clean when it first learned the disease was infectious, according to damning new research.

As international fury builds at the Chinese Communist Party's handling of the pandemic and legal challenges mount against the regime, an investigation by The Daily Telegraph shows the true impact of the cover-up.

More than 1000 Australians have now joined a global class action suing China and the lawyer leading it said yesterday Beijing's whitewash will be central to the suit, which is seeking more than $A10 trillion.

"Had they acted immediately, it would have changed the entire spectrum of the world population being affected by this," said Jeremy Alters, head strategist at Berman Law Group. "It's at least 95 per cent, because had they closed the city when they first learned about the human to human transmission … it would have bought the world somewhere between six and eight extra weeks before it ever got here.

"Six to eight extra weeks in the lifetime in which we've been living for the last three or four months is an eternity." Research by Britain's University of Southampton, to be published in the science magazine Nature in coming days, shows the spread would have been dramatically reduced if containment measures were in place before Wuhan and three other cities shut down on January 23.

Had containment strategies been implemented at the start of January, when China first hid the fact that the virus was contagious, the researchers found the spread could have been reduced by 95 per cent.

Doctors at two hospitals in Wuhan separately reported to the Chinese CDC on December 27 and 29 that the then-unnamed virus was contagious, but it wasn't until January 20, after weeks of trying to suppress the information, that the Chinese government announced this finding.

If the measures "could have been conducted one week, two weeks, or three weeks earlier in China, cases could have been reduced by 66 per cent, 86 per cent, and 95 per cent, respectively, -together with significantly -reducing the number of affected areas", says the research, which accords with several other studies.

But lead researcher Professor Andy Tatem noted the study also showed that had China delayed its January 23 quarantine for another month the outbreak would have been "about 70 times bigger than actually happened".

With the global COVID-19 infection toll approaching three million yesterday there were increasing calls to hold China accountable.

US President Donald Trump and Prime Minister Scott Morrison are among leaders demanding a probe into the pandemic origins.

US intelligence officials are investigating whether the new coronavirus came from a high-security Wuhan lab or was naturally transmitted from bats to humans.

Although conspiracists argue the virus was man-made, most scientists concur that it was biological in nature.

But this doesn't preclude the possibility the virus was being tested at the lab and -accidentally escaped.

China has repeatedly blocked efforts to investigate the virus, from disinfecting the Wuhan seafood market characterised as the inception point before any swabs could be taken, to arresting whistleblowers who tried to warn the world about what was coming.

Beijing has also orchestrated a misinformation campaign that at times has accused the US military of introducing the virus.

According to a new report by the European Union's External Action Service, China and Russia have -"targeted conspiracy narratives" to shift the blame for the outbreak.

The EU yesterday denied it had bowed to Chinese pressure to water down the disinformation report.

It followed reports that said an early version of the report referred to China running "a global disinformation campaign to deflect blame for the outbreak of the pandemic and improve its international image".

China has repeatedly -rejected calls for an independent investigation into the virus, saying it is "politically motivated".

"We are fighting the virus at the moment, we are concentrating all our efforts on fighting against the virus," top UK-based Chinese diplomat Chen Wen said this week.

"Why talk about an investigation into this? This will divert not only attention, it will divert resources." Bondi local Daniel Rowntree (pictured above) is one of more than 5600 Australians who have recovered from coronavirus and, like many, wants answers as to how it started so it can't happen again. He supports calls for an -independent international review that considers how China's Communist Party leadership responded in the early days.

"I believe in a review process to see that the same mistakes are not repeated," Mr Rowntree said He believes the cases were so widespread in China the fact was that the "horse had already bolted" at the time COVID-19 was in the international spotlight. "By the time they realised it was a pandemic, it was too late."

Timeline of how China masked the impact of the coronavirus outbreak" NOV 17: "China's first case of COVID-19 reported, but not made public until March.

DEC 10:"Wei Guixian, a seafood merchant in Wuhan's Huanan wet-market, becomes sick.

DEC 20: A total of 60 cases of COVID-19 were recorded in China. DEC 27:" Wuhan doctor Zhang Jixian warns authorities of a new contagious disease affecting 180 patients.

DEC 26-30:" Multiple Chinese genomics companies are sent evidence of a new virus from the Wuhan patient data.

DEC 31:"Chinese officials alert the World Health Organisation's China office of an outbreak of pneumonia with an unknown cause in Wuhan. Internet authorities begin stripping posts from social media that include the terms "Wuhan unknown pneumonia," "SARS variation," "Wuhan seafood market".

JAN 1:"The health commission in China's Hubei province orders a genomics company to stop all testing and destroy samples of the new coronavirus.

Wuhan police bring in for questioning eight doctors who had warned about the new virus via social media in late December.

JAN 2:"The government-run Wuhan Institute of Virology identifies coronavirus and maps its genetic sequence but doesn't publicly announce the findings.

JAN 3:"The National Health Commission issues a gag order directing all virus samples be moved to designated state testing facilities or destroyed. Institutions are also ordered to not publish any research or information about the disease.

JAN 5: "Researchers in Shanghai map the coronavirus genome and hand the data to Beijing, urging that control measures be introduced.

JAN. 6:"China's CDC activates emergency response; not publicly announced. JAN 7:"President Xi Jinping takes charge of response; not publicly disclosed until February.

JAN 9: Chinese officials and the World Health Organisation announce a cluster of pneumonia cases in Wuhan.

JAN 10:"Chinese government expert Wang Guangfa describes the Wuhan pneumonia as "under control" and a "mild condition" on state television.

JAN 11:"Frustrated that their work to map the genome hasn't yet been released by the government, Shanghai researchers publicly release the sequence.

JAN 12:"Shanghai authorities close the lab for official "rectification". JAN 14:"The WHO announces for the first time there may be "limited" person-to-person transmission.

JAN 15:"Chinese CDC emergency centre Li Qun claims on state TV the risk of transmission is low.

JAN 18:"Tens of thousands of families in Wuhan turn out for a "potluck" banquet to celebrate Lunar New Year, encouraged by authorities to try to attempt to break a world record.

JAN 20:"As President Xi makes a first public statement about the outbreak, he avoids mentioning human-to-human transmission. It is left to government task force chief Zhong Nanshan to announce the same day that the virus is being spread person-to-person.JAN 23:"Chinese authorities finally lock down Wuhan, but not before allowing 5 million to flee the city without screening.