If you liked… CATCHING MILAT Try… 7NEWS PRESENTS: IVAN MILAT - BURIED SECRETS 7PM, SUNDAY, SEVEN A YEAR after Australia's worst serial killer Ivan Milat died an appropriately painful death in maximum security prison, more of his violent secrets emerge is this gripping new Spotlight investigation by Seven.

Continuing the search for new victims and exploring more burial grounds, producers actually uncover new detail and offer fascinating analysis from criminal psychologist Tim Watson-Munro and cold case specialist Xanthe Mallett. High-profile lawyer Chris Murphy, who once considered representing the evil murderer, also makes a shock appearance.

But perhaps the most compelling, and traumatic, parts of this special is when we hear from the families of those who believe their children or partners were his unnamed victims, dating back 50 years and numbering in their dozens. Terrifying and tragic and not to be missed. - Holly Byrnes

comedy FISK 9PM, WEDNESDAY, ABC TV KITTY Flanagan (pictured), Marty Sheargold and Julia Zemiro star in this clever comedy set in a probate legal office. Flanagan is Helen Tudor-Fisk, the daughter of a supreme court judge who, at 47, has run away from life after her husband ran off with an older woman and has had to start again. It's just the 'press pause' on your weekly stream of outrage you may need, with added chuckles. - HB

lifestyle MEN IN KILTS 9PM, WEDNESDAY, FOX ONE EWAN McGregor and his Long Way Round franchise will have to share the roads and screen with another celebrity Scot in Outlander's Sam Heughan and his buddy Graham McTavish (pictured, right with Heughan. The boys-own adventure continues this week with episodes three and four, exploring their heritage and meeting an incredible collection of people who capture what it means to be Scottish. Pour a whiskey and enjoy. - HB

doco FORMULA 1: DRIVE TO SURVIVE STREAMING, FROM FRIDAY, NETFLIX COVID-19 turned a lot of world sport on its head, but somehow, Formula 1 racing managed to get back on track - albeit for a shortened 2020 season. Go behind the scenes as teams keep their distance but don't lose any of their drive and determination to win. Stars Lewis Hamilton, Aussie favourite Daniel Ricciardo (pictured) and other top drivers. - HB

MUST WATCH If you like superhero movies you'll like Zack Snyder's Justice League. Streaming from 5pm, Thursday on BINGE.

WHEN Zack Snyder stepped away from the original production of Justice League in 2017 due to a family tragedy, another director stepped in to complete the movie. For years, fans wondered what Snyder's true vision would have been, and never gave up hope of the existence of an original cut for the movie. Years later, after fans campaigned hard to make it happen, the new film is finally here. In true Snyder fashion, expect a darker, serious and grittier approach, jam-packed with action and a deeper look into the major DC Extended Universe superheroes including Superman, Batman and Wonder Woman. With an all-star cast led by Ben Affleck, Henry Cavill and Gal Gadot, it's sure to be the epic must-see movie event of the year.

movie LET THEM ALL TALK NOW STREAMING, BINGE CELEBRATED actors Meryl Streep (pictured), Dianne Wiest and Candice Bergen play old friends in this comedy-drama directed by Steven Soderbergh. Streep plays a novelist of much acclaim struggling to fi nish her latest novel. Because she doesn't fly, she decides to invite her old friends for support and even reconciliation aboard the Queen Mary 2.

drama SUPERMAN & LOIS NEW EPISODES THURSDAYS, BINGE THE superhero shows of the DC Extended Universe get even better with this new series focused on the Man of Steel and his family. Settled in Smallville, Clark Kent/Superman (Tyler Hoechlin, pictured) and Lois (Elizabeth Tulloch) are raising their two sons. They must deal with teenagers discovering their own Kryptonian powers and, of course, endless threats to the world.

doco PERSONA: THE DARK TRUTH BEHIND PERSONALITY TESTS NOW STREAMING, BINGE PERSONA explores the origins of America's great obsession with personality testing and the intriguing history behind the world-famous Myers-Briggs Type Indicator. What this documentary also raises is a whole slew of ethical questions, around how they can often do more harm than good.