NO other side best epitomises how gruelling the COVID--affected season has been than the Sydney Roosters.

Coach Trent Robinson had nine first-choice NRL players in the stand at WIN Stadium but the back-to-back premiers found a way to defeat St George Illawarra in Wollongong on Thursday night.

With Victor Radley, Sam Verrills, Brett Morris, Josh Morris, Kyle Flanagan, Boyd Cordner, Angus Crichton, Daniel Tupou and Jared Waerea-Hargreaves all unavailable, Robinson was left with a bench that had 34 games of NRL experience.

While the Roosters were missing the physical manpower, mentally he was able to field a team of 17 players who know how to win.

"The club gets used to winning, that happens, and in times of need it's still a winning mentality," Phil Gould said.

Dragons backrower Jackson Ford could be in some trouble with the match review committee after he was placed on report for a trip on Roosters playmaker Luke Keary.

"He has to be (on report), he should be off," Gould said. "That's the one that used to be a send-off ... this is the one where he can't get to it with his hand so he throws out the leg."

BUBBLE BURST The NRL's COVID-19 bubble burst on Thursday. Dragons forward Paul Vaughan was forced to sit out last night's clash after it was revealed he breached the game's strict biosecurity protocols.

Vaughan visited an Illawarra cafe for breakfast on game day and will have to self-isolate for the next 14 days. The Dragons sorely missed their key man and the go-forward he provides in the middle.

South Sydney coach Wayne Bennett was also caught in a COVID bubble drama and will be forced to self-isolate for 14 days.

FULLBACK DUEL The Dragons' pre-season started with a duel between Zac Lomax and Matt Dufty, coach Paul McGregor favouring Lomax in the No.1 jumper to start the year.

But that lasted one match and Dufty was reinstated at fullback and Lomax shifted into centre. The move has produced 20 tries this season and Lomax's form has thrust him into the State of Origin conversation.

"The strength and surge about him close to the line, his defence is so strong ... there are parts of his game when you see Origin -moments in him," Gould said.

The rising back scored two tries last night, while his effort in the kick chase and defence was as impressive.

"That was a try-saver there from Zac Lomax ... are you watching Bradley?" Gould said to NSW Blues coach Brad Fittler in commentary.

DEFENCE V DEFENCE It took the Roosters 90 seconds to crack a flimsy Dragons defence. The Dragons coughed up the ball in the first set and the punishment was immediate. Centre Joey Manu made easy work of the Red V's goal-line defence, which Gould said had little intent.

"There was no impetus in their physical contact whatsoever, they are moving backwards on their line," he said.

"For the Roosters, their defensive line is so well organised. On every play their spaces are even and ready to go. If you look at the Dragons, they are never ready to. There is a big difference between the two teams."

MILESTONE MEN The reliable Mitch Aubusson ran out on to WIN Stadium to join an illustrious group of NRL players who have played 300 games.

So it was only fitting the one-club veteran bagged a four-pointer. And it was Lachlan Lam, starting his second game, who created the opportunity for Aubusson on the left edge.

Superstar Roosters fullback James Tedesco played his 150th game since his debut in 2012.

ROOSTERS 24 DRAGONS 16 ROOSTERS Tries: J Manu 2, M Aubusson, S Tupouniua, L Keary Goals: Taukeiaho 2 DRAGONS Tries: Z Lomax 2, M Dufty Goals: Z Lomax 2