Crowning argument a winner THE inquiry commissioner Patricia Bergin's adverse report on Crown's current management running the Barangaroo Crown Casino, due, in part, to links to money laundering and criminal syndicates involved in "junkets", brings a question mark over other casino operations, including The Star Casino, Sydney; Crown Casino in Melbourne and the Crown Burswood Casino in Perth (Casino too much of a gamble, 10/2).

 If a similar inquiry was run against these casinos, would the inquiry commissioner find the same or similar issues?

Keith Range, Winston Hills

THE correlation between casinos and corruption has been understood for decades yet it would appear that the backroom deal between Barry O'Farrell then NSW Premier and Jamie Packer in 2012 giving Crown inside running without scrutiny is just grist for the mill (Casino too much of a gamble, 10/2. The rest, of course, is now history after the Bergin report concerning Crown in NSW.

 It should be noted that many of the references relating to unconscionable conduct have been derived from Crown operations in Victoria, apparently under the noses of Victorian regulators who have neither seen, heard or spoken about such matters.

Greg Angelo, Balwyn North, Vic

WHO, when, why and how unanswered So the World Health Organisation (WHO) has found it difficult to find conclusive evidence on the origins of COVID-19 (WHO fails virus test, 10/2).

 Some of that uncertainty would be due to the lengthy period of time taken to investigate the situation and stalling tactics applied by the Chinese government.

 The W.H.O. has formed an opinion of WHEN the virus was exposed; it cannot be sure HOW it was released, WHERE it actually came from, or WHO is responsible.

 Most of the world understands WHY the virus was unleashed, but perhaps not WHY organisations like the W.H.O. are necessary.

 In this current pandemic, they have been found wanting on a number of fronts, notably any form of true leadership in difficult times.

Geoff Simmonds, Strathfield South

State of play Daniel Andrews has the gall to say his COVID systems are superior to NSW (Infections make mockery of Dan's defence, 10/2).

 Who presided over the more than 800 deaths, who had a Health Minister resign in disgust at the way the quarantine hotels were being managed, who had an inquiry into the debacle and nobody could recall who had responsibility for the problem, who closed his borders requiring everyone to obtain a permit to enter, whose state racked up another three infections this week, who refuses to share the load of incoming passengers in his hotels, who uses spin over substance and who wants his residents to think he is doing a good job when most of us know that he isn't.

 Please Mr Andrews have another look at the efficient way Gladys Berejiklian is managing our state before you sprout your political waffle. Our Premier is correct in not lowering herself to respond to his nonsense.

Marg Swindells, Castle Hill

Reassurance needed As I remember it, the government's solution to reducing COVID cases in quarantine was to reduce arrival numbers for four weeks and require travellers to provide proof of a negative test result before boarding a plane to Australia from January 22. Before arrival numbers increase from February 15, how about the government assures us that the required testing at departure airports is actually occurring?

Faye Wheatley, Picnic Point

Strange decision Poor Dr Barnardo, how would he feel about all this nonsense (Charity shelves mother's award for diversity, 9/2)?

 How long before it will not be recognised that women give birth and that makes them into mothers?  So many women bypass the birth through reasons unknown, but go on to help many children who have not been fortunate enough to be born into a family with a loving and caring "mother".

 Where would the children be if not for these wonderful women that we label mothers?

 How about we stop giving awards for petty things that in everyday life is normal behaviour and just award outstanding contributions to life.

Ruth Christie, Revesby

Diverse reaction Children's charity Barnardos has axed its Mother of The Year award after 25 years because it does not celebrate other caregivers like same sex parents and grandparents (Charity shelves mother's award for diversity, 9/2).

 It would seem that this diverse group has placed pressure on Barnardos to axe the Mother of the Year award with a view to making an award that recognises all care givers. As institutions continue to be besieged by progressive activism it cannot be very long before Mother's Day will come under attack for being too traditional and not inclusive.

 Every day, in every country, you will see compelling examples of unwavering, unyielding, uninterrupted commitment of mothers to their children and families. The unconditional love a mother has for a child is its own reward Peter Penglis, Kambah, ACT

Days of a fair go are gone What a country we are turning into - motherhood under question (Mum's the word, 9/2), and the woke brigade forcing Eddie McGuire out of a job after 23 years (Eddie says bye bye Pies, 10/2), with no evidence of racist behaviour for the past eight years.

 The days of a fair go are gone. When is someone going to stand up and tell these whingers to go jump or are we going to keep caving in to every complaint?

Denis Walford, Kiama

Another scalp Eddie McGuire's scalp is now nailed to the cancel culture's post with many more to be added as the woke offended find every which way to pull down the Israel Folaus and the Margaret Courts of this new age world we find ourselves living in John Partridge, Manly

Waste of paint If our politicians would enable our police force to police rather than spend time doing administrative functions and raising revenue they wouldn't be ignoring petty crime such as graffiti (Mural vandals given a spray, 10/2).

 Petty crime costs someone, but it is all too often left unattended by police. Getting away with petty crime encourages moving to more serious crime.

Bruce, Gosford

Food for thought Why are we dumping all of our fruit and vegetables because we can't bring in workers to pick it? What about using some of the people on JobSeeker - rural districts have a very high youth unemployment? Or do we just keep putting up with weak governments?

Chris Weeks, Moorebank

Briefly ...

I'm not at all concerned about Donald Trump's impeachment, but if there is a Mr Pelosi I sure feel sorry for him.

Barry Laurie, Tweed Heads

* * * The World Health Organisation has failed to discover the origins of coronavirus. Surprise, surprise.

David Davies, Newcastle

* * * The number of times I hear the word unprecedented these days is unprecedented. Sam Saidden, Parramatta

* * * Word play for Peter Waterhouse (Letters, 10/2). Just like to poynt out that Peter has spelled the word kount wen we all no it shood be cownt. Consentrait Peter.

Tony Wilkinson, Surfers Paradise, Qld

* * * Reading about how Crown has been found unfit to hold a licence, a question came to mind: is Crown just a subsidiary of some Chinese laundry business?

Richard Merrell, Penrith

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001