Amid subdued commemorations of the 250th anniversary of James Cook's landing, the Enlightenment explorer is still making waves, writes James Morrow

It's fair to say that this year's commemorations of James Cook's arrival have not gone according to plan.

Thanks to COVID-19, there were no fireworks, no speeches, none of the hullabaloo that would normally accompany the 250th anniversary of the English explorer, navigator, map maker and scientist's arrival at Botany Bay last Wednesday.

About the only predictable thing that remained were the culture wars around Cook, which flared up on Thursday when the somewhat ironically named Annaleise van Diemen - Deputy Chief Medical Officer of Victoria - tweeted her thoughts about the event.

"Sudden arrival of an invader from another land, decimating populations, creating terror. Forces the population to make enormous sacrifices & completely change how they live in order to survive", van Diemen wrote, adding, "COVID-19 or Cook 1770?" It's a far cry from celebrations marking the 200th anniversary of Cook's landing in 1970. Then, even the New York Times got in on the act, with a travel feature advising readers 1970 would be "a special year for a trip to Australia".

"Colourful observances commemorating the great British navigator's historic explorations in 1770 will be held in Sydney and numerous other picturesque Australian cities and towns. A highlight in Sydney will be an international exposition, Panorama Of The Pacific from March 20 to March 30. Many countries with shores on the Pacific Ocean will participate in the show," the Times' Robert Trumbull wrote.

"Advance reservations indicate that thousands of overseas visitors will attend various events affiliated with the year-long Cook bicentenary celebration." So how did things change so much in fifty years? Why has Cook gone from hero to - at least in some quarters - hate figure? And who was Captain James Cook?

Humble origins While indigenous Australians have proudly lived on this land for tens of thousands of years, there is a strong case to be made that, even though federation would not occur for over a century, James Cook was the first modern Australian.

Like so many Australians, Cook was every bit the self-made man, not bound by the class boundaries and limitations of the old country but rather restless and determined to make his own way in the world.

When he was born, on October 27, 1728, the son of a Scottish farmhand in the hardly glamorous precinct of Marton-on-Cleveland, Yorkshire, there was no indication of what his life would hold.

Leaving school at the age of 12 to work as a farmhand alongside his father, then as an assistant in a nearby village shop, Cook would eventually be apprenticed to the owner of a small fleet of coal ships.

There, he would discover his passion not just for the sea (he spent most of the following nine years on the water), but for self-improvement, using the winter months when his master's vessels were laid up to study navigation and mathematics.

It was during this time, he would later write, that he formed what he would in 1774 describe (while an ice field closed in around his ship deep in the Antarctic) an "ambition not only to go farther than any one had done before, but as far as it was possible for man to go".

James King, who accompanied Cook on his third voyage, noted Cook's extraordinary personality, writing: "it's most distinguishing feature was that unremitting perseverance in the pursuit of his object, which was not only superior to the opposition of dangers, and the pressure of hardships, but even exempt from the want of ordinary relaxation." A man of his age Whereas in the previous age of exploration, sea captains set out in the service of God and country (hoping to sail home laden to the gunwales with treasure), Cook was a creature of the Enlightenment age, which elevated science and scientific discovery above all.

It was, in short, an era made for a man like Cook who - according to his biographer JC Beaglehole, who edited all three of Cook's journals of exploration - had "no politics" and "no religion".

Instead, Beaglehole says Cook had "the genius of the matter of fact. He was profoundly competent in his calling as seaman. He was completely professional in his trade as explorer. He had, in large part, the sceptical mind: he did not like taking on trust. He was therefore the great dispeller of illusion." It's a point underlined by Gregory Melleuish, associate professor of history and politics at the University of Wollongong, who says people far too often believe Cook was a conqueror, when really he was an explorer.

"Cook was a scientist. He was in charge of a scientific expedition. They were here to map things in the South Pacific, collect plants, that sort of thing - he wasn't coming to Australia to conquer," says Melleuish, who notes that one of the things they did on their voyage to Australia was to observe the astronomical phenomenon known as the transit of Venus.

"They were part of the new scientific world of the 18th century, and among the educated classes of England at the time, there was an increasing interest in that - even George III was in to clocks." Celebrated - or reviled, as the case may be - in Australia mainly for mapping eastern Australia, and proving that Australia and New Guinea were in fact two separate landmasses, Cook's journey celebrated the best Enlightenment values, which sought to erase distinctions of race and class.

When Cook and his men sailed from Plymouth on the journey that would take them to Australia, he received a series of "hints" from James Douglas, Earl of Morton and head of the Royal Society.

Douglas advised Cook "to exercise the utmost patience and forbearance with respect to the natives of the several lands where the ship may touch. To check the petulance of the sailors, and restrain the wanton use of fire arms. To have it still in view that shedding the blood of those people is a crime of the highest nature. They are human creatures, the work of the same -omnipotent author, equally under His care with the most polished -European; perhaps being less -offensive, more entitled to his favour … should they in a hostile manner oppose the landing and kill some men in the attempt, even this would hardly justify firing upon them until every other gentle -method had been tried." And while Cook's landing at Botany Bay wasn't as peaceful, there is ample evidence that Cook took these words to heart - even, in June 1770, meeting with local elders in what would become far north Queensland to negotiate, as best they could, over taking turtles from the reef to feed his men while repairing the Endeavour.

This humanity, and a love of the latest scientific equipment of his day, helped make Cook's success as a captain and navigator. In his later voyage of 1772-75, Cook would use a chronometer to determine his ship's longitude.

Determined to prevent scurvy, he experimented with every sort of fruit, vegetable or grass he could find and convince his crew to eat.

He was also a shrewd reader of his crew. One story has it that to get his reluctant men to try sauerkraut as a potential remedy against scurvy, he gave it social status by serving it only in the officers' mess.

Soon it was so popular on board it had to be rationed.

Turning of the tide So how is it that Cook's reputation has become so, to borrow a word from academia, problematic?

It's a problem Melleuish has puzzled over, but he suggests that things started to change around the 1988 Australian bicentennial, which was marked by protests and alternative histories.

"It all has to do with the Aboriginal question, and it's the same thing with the attacks on Australia Day," Melleuish says. "It's the argument about settlement versus invasion - that's another form it takes - which is all about the meaning of individual words." Add to this an Australian curriculum that is hazy on early Australian history and leaves many conflating Cook's expedition - which was entirely scientific in nature - with the First Fleet, and it's easy to see how people like Victoria's Dr van Diemen might get things confused.

"The point she may have been trying to make is that when the First Fleet turned up, so did smallpox. But Cook had nothing to do with that, and there is no evidence that he brought smallpox.

"A lot of people have a very hazy concept of Australian history and events," Melleuish says.

And, more broadly, people tend to forget that Australian exploration in the South Pacific was also driven by ongoing conflict in Europe between England and France, which was also exploring - as the existence of the Sydney suburb of La Perouse reminds us.

"Who knows, if Britain had been successful in the Americas, maybe they wouldn't have felt compelled to go to Australia," Melleuish speculates."But there was a constant war between Britain and France - the Seven Years War was really the first 'world war' - so whatever happened, one of those two powers would have been interested in this place."