TIME TO BUILD BUSHFIRE-SAFE FUTURE Linda Silmalis's report on the bushfires royal commission outlines sombre warnings and potential reforms among other highlights (Glimpse into hell, 31/10).

In the 2019-2020 bushfire season, fires destroyed 24 million hectares of land, many bush animals, 3000 houses and, sadly, 33 human lives.

It's trusted our federal, state, and territory leaders will introduce the recommendations of the royal commissioner.

These recommendations will help assist all those responsible for fire prevention, warnings, actions and rescue including ministers, commissioners, fire officers, volunteers, farmers, national parks and support agencies.

The importance of weather fire alerts, safety warnings and safety actions are paramount.

It's also important to be alert to fire lighting in danger zones, arsonists and fire carelessness.

The fair and quick distribution of donated public support money is also important.

Ron Brown, Ballina

Maybe it's time for UN to monitor US elections What an indictment of the American electoral system as its election result hangs on a knife edge despite Democrat Joe Biden leading the popular vote by four million (Joe says bye Don, 6/11).

The electoral college system is archaic and undemocratic. Its winner-takes-all set-up disregards millions of votes in states large and small, Republican or Democratic.

There is no independent control and management of the electoral process across the nation, allowing politicians to interfere with everything from the drawing of the district boundaries to the quantity and location of ballot collection boxes.

Voting is non-compulsory, with huge money and effort spent turning out the base or suppressing the other side's vote and each state sets its own election rules.

Perhaps next time the United Nations should send monitors to the US to ensure free and fair elections.

Han Yang, North Turramurra

Divided land needs a healer The question is not who has won the election in America, but who will be the healer of a nation so sadly divided in a spirit of hatred and fear (Joe says bye Don, 6/11)?

Like Jesus Christ once said, the most clear evidence of people being good is found in those who are peacemakers.

Can Australia join that healing or has the spirit of hate spread to here? So far, Scott Morrison and Anthony Albanese have been careful to stress that keeping and steadying the US alliance is their main goal.

Geoff Hinds, Merrylands

Trump legacy worth respect It now appears that, despite current dramas and court injunctions, Joe Biden's Democrats will be governing the US for the next four years (Joe says bye Don, 6/11).

Americans are on the verge of having elected a 78-year-old decent man with, unfortunately, signs of age-related decline and we can only wish him well.

It is well known that Donald Trump is a maverick-style president but, love him or hate him, he has achieved some excellent results.

Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, US unemployment was at its lowest for many years, there were more jobs available than before, the share market was good and business confidence high.

He started dialogue with North Korea and was responsible for several Arab nations signing agreements to rightfully acknowledge Israel as a separate state in the Middle East. No mean feat and one his predecessors could not achieve.

It is to be hoped his eventual concession speech contains some grace so he may be remembered with a form of respect for the job he did for his country.

Darryl Tutton, Wollstonecraft

Praise for health heroes In a victory for common sense, Australia's vaccination rates have hit a record high with figures revealing five-year-olds are 94.9 per cent fully vaccinated (Vax rate hits high despite fake fears, 1/11).

Programs such as No Jab, No Play and No Jab, No Pay have played a critical role. Apparently high-profile anti-vaxxers' ideas have failed to resonate with parents.

Everyone involved in promoting vaccination should take a bow. Peter Penglis, Kambah, ACT

An investment in future Referring to Vikki Campion's column on the importance of investing in childcare, there has never been a time in modern Australia when "don't breed them if you can't feed them" was good economic policy (Forget the kidults, give kidlings some dough - Vikki Campion, 31/10).

Our economy requires well-educated mature adults. Our birthrate is too low, we produce too few.

Experience shows we need to start investing in adults from a very young age and ensure they benefit from that early start.

Childcare is an opportunity for every "village" to assist parents in educating their kids, a major part of which is learning to interact with their peers.

Peter Egan, Artarmon

Remembering our heroes Your pride of Australia promotion (Thanks a million, 31/10) brought back memories of the terrible bushfires of last summer.

Having been evacuated to Malua Bay beach on December 31, my heroes would have to be our surf club lifesavers.

With literally thousands of evacuees descending upon our little surf club, they managed to register everybody, provide food (donated by locals), keep us informed and, best of all, managed to hand out hot drinks (coffee, etc).

And, all of this with no power, no mobile coverage and under constant threat from the firestorm that surrounded us.

Janice Russell, Malua Bay

Getting pickled at Christmas Thank you for your food feature in todays SMARTdaily section (Something to keep on the side, 6/11).

Every year (at this time) I start pickling (and bottling) vegetables. Pickled cucumbers are a Christmas gift to family and friends rather than the obligatory greetings card.

I recently went to the fruit and vegetable markets at Flemington where I purchased a 5kg box of Lebanese cucumbers. I then spent the weekend pickling and bottling.

I will be returning soon to purchase more fresh produce and to try the recipes in the SMART food column - especially the Sauerkraut - to accompany my slow-cooker corned beef.

Gloria Velleley, Belrose

Let fans call the tune The "it's a wake-up call" response to the Blues loss on Wednesday night is a bit tough (Freddy's dilemma: Is it stick or twist, 6/11).

I thought they played well considering the out-of-position, out- of-form selections they had to contend with.

I suggest that in future we should play the series at the end of the season and let the team be picked by the fans - at least we would be responsible for the angst.

Barrie Laurie, Tweed Heads Don't wine about Adelaide Your editorial commentary which claimed that "it is a well-known fact that nothing good ever happens in Adelaide" is a bit harsh (A home town turnaround, 6/11).

What about all the christenings, marriages and celebrations of lives well lived in "The City of Churches"?

To say nothing of all the wonderful wine.

Douglas Mackenzie, Deakin, ACT

State pride is on the line The State of Origin on Wednesday is not only a defining football match, but the pride of NSW is riding on the outcome. Please boys, keep the series alive. I can't stand the thought of a sardonic Queensland premier and her next crass text to our Gladys if her side wins. Go the Blues.

Marg Swindells, Castle Hill

HAVE YOUR SAYMAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001