IF COVID-19 hadn't hit, game one of State of Origin would've been played last Wednesday in Adelaide.

Instead, under the NRL's revised draw, we must wait until November 4 to see NSW and Queensland collide.

That's the best news Nathan Cleary could ever hear because, right now, Parramatta's Mitchell Moses is leading the marathon to wear the prized No.7 Blues jumper that Cleary wore in Origins I and II last year.

If NSW coach Brad Fittler had to pick his side tomorrow, Moses would be his seven from heaven.

That's the problem with missing games in the NRL, you're quickly forgotten. Loyalty can only last so long.

Cleary's two-game suspension for breaking the game's coronavirus -protocols has left him chasing form, -respect - and Moses.

Like the rest of us, the Panthers playmaker has watched the return of footy unfold from his living room - -albeit, hopefully by himself.

He would've watched the obvious -elevation of Moses' game in 2020 to a near-complete halfback highlight package of kick-control, intensity, energy, awareness and as Steve "Blocker" Roach said on Fox League last night, "a desire to always be in the game".

While there's still work to be done, Moses has finally found the balance of knowing when to pull the trigger and when to play safe.

Last night, he picked and prodded at the Manly defence, be it through his two tackle busts and offload, or a chip-and-chase to keep Manly fullback Tom Trbojevic thinking.

His 74th minute field goal to give the Eels a psychological edge was exactly what was required. The fact that Moses is combining with a 19-year-old rookie in Dylan Brown, speaks to the halfback's level of maturity and leadership of the Eels.

Make no mistake, Moses' direction of this quality Parramatta side is the very reason they wake this morning having achieved their best start to a season since 1989.

Fittler has always been a Moses fan having coached the precocious talent when representing Lebanon at the 2017 World Cup.

So impressed was he with Moses' ability to absorb pressure, when naturally Lebanon were outclassed by their NRL-stacked opponents, that Fittler claimed the now 25-year-old was "designed for State of Origin".

That was three years ago when Moses had played 67 NRL games for the Wests Tigers. Last night was game 134 of his career and 68 for the Eels.

He is now just four games away from becoming the first halfback to play more than 71 games in the Eels' No. 7 jumper since Peter Sterling retired 28 years ago.

His 69th game in the blue and gold comes on Friday night against Penrith. Over to you, Mr Cleary.