NEW TIGER GETS REAL-LIFE OPPORTUNITY AFTER 'SIMULATING' TEDESCO

DAINE Laurie has been asked twice before to fill the boots of James Tedesco - or at least give his best impersonation.

So the livewire from Iluka studied the tapes and watched Roosters games live. Then when Thursday evening rolled around and Penrith coach Ivan Cleary ran his boys out for their weekly opposed session at Panthers HQ, Laurie did his best to mimic the style, sweeps and everything else rugby league's No. 1 fullback has in his bag of tricks.

Officially, Laurie was part of the Cougars - a name last year given to those Penrith NSW Cup players who, with their own competition cancelled during COVID-19, grew increasingly fond of Thursday scrimmages against the NRL boys.

"Because that became our game day," the new Wests Tigers fullback recalled now, five months on.

"Or that's how we viewed it.

"If first grade were playing the Roosters, then it was up to us Cougars - that's what they called us - to learn, then run the Roosters sets against them.

"And before every session, we'd speak as a group about how important it was to rip in and get that right.

"To make sure we did everything we could to help the boys out. "So while it was frustrating for me to watch them out there on the weekends, winning and having so much fun, it was also my job to make sure it kept happening." Which, as you can imagine, had really ramped up for Laurie and his Cougars come October.

When in that week before the NRL finals, and with Penrith on an undefeated run stretching 15 games, he again mimicked that Roosters fullback who, days later, against Nathan Cleary, Stephen Crichton and Viliame Kikau, would be dusted in an upset loss, just like they were in round one.

So as for again being called in to replace the NSW Origin megastar, this time in the Tigers jersey he quit four years ago?

"I've always liked Tedesco, obviously," Laurie said. "But it's not who I model my game on.

"No, that's my uncle Cody Walker," this newest Tiger, only 21, added. "Just the way he plays - eyes up, good hands, that's how I want to be. But James Tedesco, yeah, he's definitely next level." Which isn't anything Wests Tigers fans need to be told again. Especially given this afternoon at Campbelltown Sports Stadium, and with the little 'c' next to his name, Tedesco once more returns to cause carnage against the club he was supposed to bring greatness.

Indeed, it has now been almost four years to the day since the Menangle farm boy - back then off contract with Luke Brooks, Aaron Woods and Mitchell Moses - was ordered by coach Ivan Cleary to decide on a contract which, worth about $1 million, was sitting on the desk of his agent Isaac Moses.

Tedesco was issued an ultimatum, a decision which has not only been widely panned since, given he walked, but has also moved the club through six players - or eight if you include contract offers to Latrell Mitchell and Josh Addo-Carr - in an increasingly difficult bid to replace him.

Should Cleary have given Tedesco more time? Regardless, when asked in April, 2017 if he would have stayed were it not for the deadline, Tedesco told Sydney radio station 91.3FM: "Yeah, possibly. Ivan told me and my management that they wanted an answer by Friday that week.

"We both said then we weren't ready to make a decision, (but) he was pretty adamant that he wanted an answer by the end of the week.

"They made it public too, which ... I didn't really think there was a need for that." Worse happened next for the NRL battlers who, suddenly cashed up, paid big to land Josh Reynolds, Moses Mbye, Russell Packer and Chris McQueen - none of which got to the heart of the real problem, which was: When Tedesco sat down with club officials, and was sold on a vision for the future, he couldn't see it. Just as, two years later, Mitchell wouldn't see it either.

Which is no small thing when looking through the prism of $1 million contract offers. But what both wanted, more than anything, was to be part of a genuine premiership contender. Which, coincidentally, brings us back to Laurie.

That rising indigenous talent who isn't so much "The Next Tedesco" as a guy who, only five months ago, was confined to imitating him.

Still, Laurie is indicative of the change now happening inside Tigers HQ. An evolution found, increasingly, in the detail.

Like the fact that the club's four major decision makers - coach Michael Maguire, CEO Justin Pascoe, chairman Lee Hagipantelis, and football manager Adam Hartigan - returned to their same desks this year. For the first time in some time, the Tigers have stability. They have re-signed Dave Nofoaluma, kept Zane Musgrove from St George Illawarra and snared rising New Zealand backrower Tuki Simpkins, while also keeping enough money to chase that next big name.