ORIGIN ON MOVE State of Origin may have played its last mid-year series. If this year's event rates well on TV after the grand final, it will become a regular end-of-season series.

Too often the premiership rounds are ruined over six weeks in June and July while 34 of the NRL's best players are unavailable for their clubs.

It affects the integrity of the comp because the stronger teams lose up to half a dozen players, while other sides remain at full strength. Some teams get to play with their Origin stars, others don't.

WHITE STRIP NOT GOOD AS GOLD: JACK Champion Balmain No. 1 Garry Jack has launched a furious attack on Wests Tigers management, angry the club no longer plays in his beloved Balmain gold colours at Leichhardt Oval. Jack was recently interviewed by Adam Hawse on his excellent new podcast, The Fend. "We only play at Leichhardt Oval three times a year and we wear the Wests' black outfit," Jack said. "That's disrespectful to all Balmain fans. "I feel dudded. It should be a gold jersey at Leichhardt. The gold strip has gone, now it's white and it's rubbish. Someone needs to be held accountable for this. "When these two sides came together for the birth of Wests Tigers we were supposed to have one black strip and one gold strip as part of the deal."

PARTY PAIN Coaches and players continue to make huge sacrifices for the NRL during COVID-19. Canberra Raiders coach Ricky Stuart's son Jack turns 21 this weekend and is having a party. But Stuart can't go, due to biosecurity protocols in place to safeguard the game. They will have to wait and have a beer and dinner at the end of the season.

WAY OF WARRIORS Warriors players and staff have made mighty efforts keep the premiership up and running this year, and now the women's team will do the same to ensure the NRLW competition goes ahead as planned during the finals series. Many of the squad will be leaving family and friends behind in New Zealand so they can represent the Warriors. Australian Jillaroos head coach Brad Donald has been recruited to mentor the team and give them the best possible chance of success.

FRIEND SHIP SAILS ON The Sydney Roosters are about to sign inspirational veteran Jake Friend on a new one-year deal. The 30-year-old hooker has played 259 games and won three premierships for the Roosters since debuting in 2008. His form and leadership has been outstanding all season in a team knocked around with injuries to senior players. Without Sam Verrills for most of the season, Friend has played long minutes but thrived with extra workload.

GO CLINT Clint Newton might have retired from the NRL in 2015 at the Newcastle Knights but he's still playing footy. The 39-year-old RLPA boss has switched codes to play third-grade rugby union on the Central Coast, for Avoca.