When we speak of security in terms of biological research, most -people assume this to mean security surrounding laboratories and the like.

In a time of great concern over the source of the COVID-19 virus that has now infected more than 3.7 million people and killed close to 260,000, that is certainly a very legitimate assumption.

This is especially so given that China has undertaken substantial research into bat--related viruses - and that an amount of that research -occurred in partnership with Australia's CSIRO.

But an equally great security concern is political.

A laboratory may be perfectly sealed and sterile, but the information gathered within those protected facilities must also be safely locked down.

That issue now prompts Morrison government Senators, Matt Canavan, Sarah Henderson and Jim Molan to propose a federal oversight agency to -ensure there is no foreign interference in Australia's science and research sector.

"There are credible claims that China has sought to abuse our open and free academic -environment to further their strategic goals," Senator Canavan points out "There is a national interest in protecting the security of our high-level research." Senator Henderson is of like mind. "A federal agency to regulate research by foreign nat-ionals would be an important way of combating foreign interference," she said.

The requirement for such an authority becomes even more obvious following exclusive revelations in The Daily Telegraph of professional ties between a scientist employed by China's People's Liberation Army and the director of Australia's Animal Health Laboratory - -recently renamed the Centre for Disease Preparedness.

The Daily Telegraph does not suggest any wrongdoing by any party in this specific instance. We simply point out the professional connections.

Dr Tu Changchun of the PLA's Academy of Military Medical Sciences has a fascinating background in coronavirus research and also happens to sit on the board of the Wuhan -Institute of Virology's scientific advisory committee.The Institute, of course, is now at the centre of the global probe into COVID-19's origins.