Joy as 40,000 fans lap up a grand final which beat pandemic odds

THE greatest thing about last night's grand final was not the game itself but the fact that it was played at all.

And the man behind that was not wearing a jersey on the pitch but a suit in the 40,000-strong crowd - Australian Rugby League chairman Peter V'landys.

"In March it looked like there was every chance we wouldn't be having a grand final," Sydney Cricket Ground Trust chairman Tony Shepherd said.

"I think we have got to recognise that the NRL under Peter V'landys leadership has done an outstanding job.

"But it would not have been possible without the co-operation of the NSW Government and its key ministers and their sensible and pragmatic approach." An elated Storm captain Cameron Smith struck a sombre note in his first post match interview, underscoring the incredible sacrifice of players who signed up to COVID safe bubbles, their teammates replacing their families.

The players devoted themselves to the game and in doing so lifted fans from the worst days of the pandemic to find joy again in live sport.

Smith wished he could hug his wife and children, as did other celebrating players last night but it was not to be.

"It was a special effort given what everyone has been through this year," Smith said.

"We haven't been home for five months, with the conditions that we have been under it is a remarkable effort to be here tonight and to get a victory.

He later added: "We haven't slept in our own beds for five months and in the past 80 days we have been out of our accommodation twice and we turn up every day with a great attitude and being resilient. Thank you to our families for the sacrifices you have made." Ryan Papenhuyzen won the Clive Churchill medal and dedicated it to the people of Melbourne, now well into months of lockdown.

Panthers Captain James Tamou paid tribute to Mr V'landys as the man who got the game back amid the pandemic and he also recognised the sacrifice of the Storm players who were forced to flee their state when COVID-19 resurged there.

The V'landys approach weighed the considerable risks of the virus against the benefits to the economy, the code and the morale of Australians and he pushed to let the season go ahead safely.

When Mr V'landys first announced that teams would run out onto the pitch on May 28 he was met with howls of criticism.

In defiance of the critics the season restarted - one of the first sports in the world to resume play. But it was not achieved without sacrifice.

The players have been in strict biosecurity bubbles - unable to visit cafes, pubs, restaurants or beaches.

For Penrith superstar Nathan Cleary that has meant his mum has not been able give her son a hug for four months. "You just want to give them a big hug but you can't touch them," she said ahead of last night's final.

But that is not about to change with Cleary going straight into State of Origin commitments with his NSW teammates that do not end until November 18.

It has also impacted the players' families. The family of Penrith ball runner Viliame Kikau would have normally been at ANZ Stadium but COVID-19 restrictions mean they are stuck at home in the tiny village of Bau in Fiji.

Next season may be no different. Last week the game's COVID expert, Doctor David Heslop, warned clubs that they could be kicking off in the same bubbles with a vaccine unlikely to be available before the middle of the year.

However last night, in the rain, none of that mattered to the lucky 40,000 fans who were able to attend. Among the first through the gate were Panthers fans Dale Cunliffe, his son Preston, sister Aimee, niece Riley Brooks and mother Sharon.

"We're over the moon the game was allowed to take place, it was almost looking like the government was going to cancel the NRL," he said.

"We're just glad that the NRL hadn't been shut down, I was here when the Panthers won the finals in 2003 and I'm here now- no amount of rain or COVID would have stopped me being here.

"The atmosphere might not be charged like before, but we as a family are - we're die hard Panther supporters." Mum Jenna Douglas battled heavy traffic and rain from the Blue Mountains with her daughter Lyla, 11, and sons Jasper, 14, and Wilson, 16, to catch a glimpse of the Panthers four hours before the 7.30pm kick-off.

"The grand final is the grand final, we're amazed but relieved the grand final was given permission to go ahead and we're all excited to be part of it," she said. Sydney based Storm supporters made up for those stuck at home, turning swathes of the stands purple.