The mask is off. Following Facebook's widespread erasure of Australian pages from its platform, we now see exactly who and what we are dealing with.

Forget Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg's previously declared aims of "protecting our community from abuse and hate, defending against interference by nation states" and "making sure that time spent on Facebook is time well spent".

Replace those lofty ideals with an awareness that Facebook is a ruthless trillion-dollar entity prepared to sweep an entire nation aside if it doesn't get its way.

Invited to negotiate terms over its currently unpaid use of news content, Facebook has responded by shutting down not only news pages but also pages run by charities, government health sites, emergency services, animal rescue organisations and hospitals, among many others.

Most chillingly of all, Facebook scrubbed a domestic violence charity page run in memory of Australian Hannah Clarke and her three little children, who were doused in petrol and set alight by Ms Clarke's estranged husband exactly one year ago today.

Great timing, Facebook.

There are many parallels between Facebook's actions yesterday and China's reaction to Australian demands for an investigation into COVID-19's Wuhan origins.

China hit Australia with damaging trade barriers and tariffs. Now Facebook has hit us with indiscriminate and reckless page purges.

There is another similarity between the behaviour of China and Facebook, however, and it exposes Facebook's tactical clumsiness.

The emergence of the coronavirus and subsequent global economic disruption revealed just how dependent Western nations had become on Chinese imports and trade.

That wake-up call resonated particularly strongly in Australia, where an understanding continues to grow about the need for our nation to both find new markets and become far more self-reliant.

Likewise, Facebook's strategy reveals exactly how dependent Australians have become on a US-based social media platform that cares not at all for the welfare of Australian users.

Just as with China, Australians now know we must find other ways to connect and be informed online.

Significant opportunities now exist for multiple local developers to present their own platforms and sites. Just because Facebook is big does not mean it cannot be replaced.

"They may be changing the world," PM Scott Morrison said yesterday of monster tech companies, "but that doesn't mean they should run it." He makes a good point, and also reminds Australians of the power held by such companies.

That points to another tactical error by Facebook. The business has responded to proposed measures intended to address Facebook's excessive power by reminding everybody exactly how powerful it is.

And what a way to do it - by silencing children's charities and the like. Brilliant work, Facebook. You sure showed them who's boss.

There will be some winners out of all of this, of course.

In the absence of real news and data on Facebook, fake news, propaganda and calculated misinformation will become far more prominent.

So much for Zuckerberg's vow to make sure "time spent on Facebook is time well spent".

Instead, it will likely become a haven for conspiracy theorists and other identities currently shoved to the margins. At a time of global contagion, this is not an optimal situation. But we will emerge the better for this. Facebook may well find out that it needs our money more than we need its platform.