Scourge of narcotics is user-driven Kyle Sandilands' girlfriend escapes punishment for slapping a policewoman while high on cocaine (Cop slap sparked by crisis, 15/4). What does it take for our courts to get serious?

Drugs are a scourge on our society, and almost daily we hear of big police busts happening.

It takes two to tango; without buyers there'd be no sellers. Drug suppliers are driven by those who are willing to part with good money for this rubbish.

This will continue until our courts toughen up on both suppliers and consumers. If not, why not just legalise illicit drugs and then authorities would have control and could tax these substances, freeing up police to go after more serious crime?

Jim, Sylvania

PM right to go into bat against pro-China WHO So, the World Health Organisation is giving its blessings for China to -reopen wet markets (PM blasts WHO over reopening of markets, 15/4).

Talk about a batty organisation. It is obvious all they are interested in is China.

Scientists believe live bats gave us coronavirus through a third-party animal. Both bats and third-party animals are sold live at wet markets. Yet the WHO is allowing these markets to continue on the basis that their closure would hurt the livelihood of the Chinese and impact their food security.

In February the WHO also said nations closing borders to China would do "more harm than good". Given that and the WHO's latest blessing it is obvious all they care about is 'harm' to China. They don't really care about the rest of the world. No wonder Prime Minister Scott Morrison has blasted their decision as "unfathomable".

I am no fan of US President Donald Trump, but given the apparent warmth the WHO has with China, it's no wonder the US is cutting funds to it.

The WHO wants unity and needs funding from all nations. It should therefore, consider the effect coronavirus has had on all nations and not just favour China.

Taro Munn, Watanobbi

Wet market visa bans It seems the WHO is reluctant to insist on the closure of so-called wet markets in Asia.

Given many of the diseases we are now battling apparently originate in markets like these, it would make sense when the restrictions are eased, to permanently ban all visitors to and from countries that refuse to close such markets down.

If most of the major countries around the world enforced this, I'm betting it would be a lot more effective than anything the WHO might do or not do.

Peter Thorpe, Randwick

Ensuring school safety PM Scott Morrison's call to send the kids back to school may be based on the advice of his advisers but it shouldn't go ahead without a radical implementation of basic preventive action, like that in Singapore (Back to school plea to teachers, 15/4).

All teachers should be equipped with no-touch thermometers to screen out those most at risk and this should happen twice a day.

Schools must be able to provide adequate handwashing facilities and soap in single-touch containers.

Gel sanitiser and wipes must be available in each classroom. All classroom surfaces need to be cleaned twice daily with chlorine dioxide, the steriliser proven to be active against coronavirus and used in Wuhan and airports across Asia.

Any case of infection should necessitate school closure and "fogging" with the same chlorine dioxide.

We must protect our teachers and childcare workers as well as children and their families.

Dr Colin Hughes, Midland DC, WA

Unwanted anti-vax advice With the world eagerly awaiting the discovery of a vaccine to fight COVID-19, why would anyone take the word of people whose only claim to fame is acting and surfing (Loco Lucas spreading anti-vax nonsense, 15/4).

When some of the best medical and scientific minds are feverishly researching and trialling a cure which could take many months to pass stringent protocols, what makes these people think their anti-vaccination opinion is valid.

It's the same with the person with a lamp which is purported to cure this illness.

Please don't wade into areas where you probably have no medical knowledge or background, don't stand in the way with unproven theories. There will always be naysayers but now is not the time for this message.

Maybe they should read another article in Wednesday's Telegraph about how artist Pink and her young son Jameson have suffered after contracting coronavirus (Virus-stricken star extremely sick, 15/4).

Marg Swindells, Castle Hill

Show Nine the door The NRL should say to Channel 9: There's the door don't let it hit you on the way out (Nine's NRL wipeout, 15/4).

There are more options to televise without them and, who knows, we might even get back 7pm starts to State of Origin games and 4pm Sunday afternoon grand finals.

Peter Wilcox, Blayney

When justice system fails Cardinal George Pell's wrongful conviction for serious crimes against children and his subsequent exoneration by our highest court, raises serious questions about our entire judicial system (Cardinal: My life in jail's Unit 8, 15/4).

Since his release Pell has remarked in interviews that one of his former inmates, he believes, has been wrongly convicted of murder. Pell, as an experienced and extremely well educated priest would not, I suggest, have formed this opinion lightly.

Pell had the financial backing to pursue his innocence all the way to the High Court but many others who claim their innocence do not enjoy such support.

This means they can be locked away for 10, 20, 30 years even though they are innocent.

How do we right such wrongs; what if Pell's former 'cell mate' is innocent; how many others are there in this space?

This is serious and needs to be addressed. Let us not forget Victoria's Lawyer X!

John George, Terrigal,

Briefly … As well as the Ruby Princess, we should be looking at the way we allowed plane passengers to arrive with little screening or checks for many weeks into the pandemic (It's double trouble for Ruby liner, 15/4). Must be changes for the future.

M Long, Lake Haven "" " Kudos to Scott Morrison and his tireless team working beside him. The "quiet Australians" appreciate all the hard work and long hours being put in to help us through this crisis. Go Team Australia.

Janice Russell, Malua Bay "" " Donald Trump cutting off cash to the shambolic, left-leaning World Health Organisation will scare the living daylights out of this mob (Trump cuts WHO funding - Online, 15/4).

David Ingram, Randwick "" " They say we follow whatever America does. Well, they have just stopped funding the WHO - let's hope the UN is next. I have no problem with following (Trump cuts WHO funding - Online, 15/4).

Herbert Montaine, Tugun Qld "" " Well XXXXX done, Tim Blair (Caught in the redact 15/4)! Give XXXXX Beijing some of its own XXXXX medicine. See how they XXXXX like it.

Tony XXXXX, XXXXX Coast "" " Five months to investigate how/why the Ruby Princess was allowed to dock in Sydney (It's double trouble for Ruby liner, 15/4). Five months! Unbelievable. Who is leading the investigation, Inspector Clouseau?

Geoff, NSW "" " Commonsense should be used when thinking of reopening schools (Back to school plea to teachers, 15/4). Kids and teachers at school can and will make matters worse. Best to wait for the all clear before relaxing any restrictions.

Ted, Bankstown

HAVE YOUR SAYMAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily TelegraphGPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001