Cam, it's Eels who were hard done by So Cameron Smith thinks that he was hard done by, with the NRL coming down on the Storm for salary cap breaches of almost $3.8m over five years (You're wrong Cam, 16/11).

He should get over it and move on … preferably out of the game. And if he thinks he's hard done by, what about Parramatta? The NRL should award the 2009 premiership to them because they were beaten by a team that was proven to be cheating and had the title (rightly) stripped from them.

Not to mention the endorsements that Parramatta would have received for being premier.

Cameron's autobiography (The Storm Within) is definitely something I will not have on my Christmas list.

G. Evans, Kaleen, ACT

What if both sides of politics have it wrong?

A tale of politicians lecturing, not listening?

In Monday's Telegraph … on the one hand BlueScope Steel is pouring money in to support the NSW government's wind, solar and battery fantasies (Big Blue boost to green energy, 16/11) while Hunter Valley voters are deserting the Labor Party in droves due to Anthony Albanese's climate policy (Workers revolt, 16/11).

Surely there is a disconnect here? NSW Liberal Energy Minister Matt Kean is striving for net zero emissions - to meet a Labor/Greens climate agenda; while Labor's Joel Fitzgibbon could lose his seat for Labor unless the ALP abandons its climate obsession?

Perhaps, both parties have it wrong on climate and the emissions obsession? Bob Partington, Wahroonga

Fitz is right fit for workers Joel Fitzgibbon is right to consider the workers in his electorate (Labor must not ignore blast from Fitzgibbon, 16/11).

He seems to be the only one in the Labor Party that realises that unless they stop aligning themselves with the Greens and placing too much emphasis on climate change, political correctness etc. they will be left in the wilderness.

Blue-collar workers want jobs, and manufacturing, not all the other garbage. Tony, Ryde

Pollies have lost their way The ALP hasn't genuinely represented workers for at least a generation, possibly much longer (Workers revolt, 16/11).

The new political class is consumed by party intrigues and power struggles that leave little time to actually connect with those outside of their bubble.

There is much effort put into theorising and analysing demographics to win votes without actually coming into contact with many individuals who have not directly involved themselves in the political process.

The closest most pollies come into contact with a fluoro vest is when they put on their pristine version for the cameras before scurrying back to the safety of their white cars.

Unfortunately, the Liberals are no better, appearing hellbent on following the ALP down the same woke rabbit hole and having quiet Australia serve their chosen political gods, whether they want to or not.

Bruce Collison, Banks, ACT

Just a steam-age dreamer There's no great need to take notice of Joel Fitzgibbon and his claims about defending the jobs and future of coal miners (Labor must not ignore blast from Fitzgibbon, 16/11).

If he really meant any of it, he'd be jumping up and down with demands that we go back to steam trains. And heating our houses with coal. And cooking on coal-fuelled stoves. And changing our cars to coal-fuelled steam power.

Our coal-loving Prime Minister Scott Morrison would be backing him up, too. But neither of them has said a word on the matter. Why not? Don't they want to win seats in Queensland?

GTW Agnew, Coopers Plains, Qld

Honouring elite bunch Great news for NSW Police detectives to be issued with an identification badge exclusively for them (Badge for NSW's finest, 16/11).

Detectives are an elite bunch with many crime squads created to tackle the ever-increasing violations and offences in our society.

So, 200 detective positions each year seems a small amount of man/womanpower to add to the current numbers of plain-clothed officers. Not taking away from the general duties officers, who are first responders at a road accident or crime scene. They all do a wonderful job in keeping us safe.

To the new detective graduates awaiting their promotions, treat your "new badge" as you have the one issued to you when you joined the constabulary.

Gloria Velleley, Belrose

Badge won't catch crooks Wow. We should all be jumping for joy, our police detectives now have a new badge (Badge for NSW finest, 16/11).

This, I'm sure, is going to markedly improve crime solving and putting the crooks behind bars! I just hope I never have to see one.

John George, Terrigal

Adelaide cluster a warning As the crowds start to gather for Christmas and New Year parties, to me many people seem to be living in a fool's paradise thinking COVID-19 has disappeared from Australian shores with no new cases and many want the safety procedures ended.

But then 17 new cases just turned up in Adelaide (Three states shut borders to SA as COVID cluster jumps to 17 - Online, 16/11).

It seems hard for people to understand that you cannot defeat this killer disease until a fully successful vaccine is found, and even then it could be years before everyone in the world is safe to travel.

Robert Livingstone, Alexandria

Resetting vocabulary Regarding the report in Monday's The Daily Telegraph on a new regional free trade deal (Trade deal to ease tension with China, 16/11) … the first paragraph begins with "Australia is hoping to reset its embattled trade relationship with China".

Readers might want to remember that word "reset" because they are going to be hearing it a lot more in 2021.

"The Great Reset" is the major theme of the next World Economic Forum to be held in January.

B Thompson, Cowra

Briefly … If Donald Trump is too proud to concede he should just resign, Vice President Mike Pence can become President of USA and then he can concede. But just go, please.

Sam Saidden, Parramatta "" " While I agree with the minor alteration to the national anthem, why don't we consider the complete replacement with the Seekers' beautiful I Am Australian. Surely this ticks all the boxes.

Chris Quinn, Kings Langley "" " How dare the federal government sign up to a trade agreement with China (Trade deal to ease tension with China, 16/11). And, shame on the other 13 countries.

Paul Clancy, Kogarah "" " Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk's COVID-eradicating magic wand used so effectively to clear Suncorp Stadium of the dreaded virus so State of Origin can be played before a capacity crowd must be an outstanding piece of equipment. I look forward to this same wand being used to eradicate the $100-plus billion state debt.

Jack Jackson, Burleigh Heads "" " What does Albo expect? Of course, the Hunter Valley has deserted the ALP but still he won't listen to Joel Fitzgibbon (Workers revolt, 16/11). Mark Butler is Albo's best weapon if he wants to head for four election losses in a row with his ridiculous climate change policy.

Dazza, Singleton "" " The Coalition have introduced JobKeeper, JobSeeker and JobMaker. With their climate and energy plans it looks like the ALP is planning JobKiller. I expect it will work a treat.

Doug Hurst, Chapman, ACT

HAVE YOUR SAYMAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001