TOUCH DOWN The terrible amount of injuries in the NRL so far this season are not just restricted to the players. Touch judge Kasey Badger has been ruled out for the season because of a bulging disk in her back that may require surgery. She will visit a specialist this week.

POTTER'S PUPPY SCHOOL Former Dally M player-of-the-year Mick Potter is making a comeback to coaching. He has been appointed head coach of Mounties, now the feeder club for the Canterbury Bulldogs.

Potter won the Dally M award when he was playing fullback at the Bulldogs in 1984.

He will work closely with new Canterbury coach Trent Barrett to develop fringe first graders.

Barrett has had a massive cleanout of the Bulldogs coaching staff with Steve Georgeallis, Harry Harris, Tony Grimaldi and Tony Ayoub all being moved on.

AB REACHES OUT TO GREEN Axed Cowboys coach Paul Green was spotted having lunch at Airlie Beach on Thursday with cricket legend Allan Border.

Border reached out to Green when he lost his job at the Cowboys in July. "When I got sacked AB sent me a really nice text," Green said, "He's one of my idols, so it was really uplifting. He's one of our greatest sporting legends.

"He told me I'd done a great job at the Cowboys and said my sacking was bullshit." Green was also in Brisbane last week to catch up with some old friends, including Maroons Origin teammate Paul 'Knuckles' Greenhill.

He denies he was there to speak to the Broncos.

JEFF & SUZEE GO THE DISTANCE Many said it would never last … When Jeff Fenech married his beautiful wife Suzee 24 years ago, guests - including James Packer - had their doubts.

"At the wedding reception they were even running a sweepstake on how long it would last," Fenech said.

"I think James picked six months and said I'd be lucky to last that long." Last week Fenech and his wife celebrated their 24th anniversary. Many believe that Suzee deserves a matrimonial medal.

The owner of Ecco at Drummoyne closed the restaurant for the night, just for the two of them to mark the occassion.

They ate caviar, lobster and prawns and had the best champagne and wines.

SOUTHS' MASKED CRUSADE The Rabbitohs' most popular merchandise item this year are the COVID-19 masks. Fans have snapped up 7000 of the 9000 that have been made with the club's logo in four colours.

At $20 each, it's been a profitable exercise for a footy club that has suffered like all NRL teams from not having full attendances at their home games in 2020. Owner Russell Crowe came up with the mask idea and gave away 1000 to Souths members over 70.