Stumpy was a giant of our game Vale Arthur Summons (Gladiator to the end, 18/5).

Arthur Summons, nicknamed Stumpy, who died in Wagga Wagga aged 84 has left an everlasting impact on the game of rugby league.

Even though the half back was short in stature he was a giant in the game. What a fitting tribute to him and Norm Provan to be immortalised in that iconic NRL premiership trophy, too.

Gone but not forgotten, RIP Arthur Summons.

Joy Cameron, Young

Sad Greens reduced to playing comic relief card It's amazing what the Greens' Adam Bandt, Sarah Hanson-Young and the rest of their loony ilk can come up with (Greens' dream dead on arrival, 18/5).

If we were to adopt their policies or even just a few of them, Australia would be "up the creek without a paddle".

It will be hard enough to come back to economic prosperity from the Wuhan virus pandemic, without a bunch of fanatics trying to hijack our recovery.

It's so ludicrous in fact, I'm sure the clowns of our parliament have dreamt up this "green deal" as a bit of comic relief, to put a smile on our faces in these tense pandemic and economic times.

Peter Cattlin, Freshwater

The sacrifices of science History writer Troy Lennon has captured the real essence of human courage challenging science, describing the work and untimely death of volcanologist David Johnston 40 years ago. (Scientist died as Mount St Helen blew its top, 18/5).

The same selfless bravery is evident as the world records more than 1000 deaths of health workers battling the murderous COVID-19 virus.

When science entices our curiosity like the sirens of Greek mythology, the dangers and benefits of exploring Pandora's box are unfairly shared.

A singular, academic focus in David Johnston's life might well have blinded his instinct for safety and survival.

As is true in the fight with COVID-19, much is unknown, including assessing risk.

No volcanic smoke can hide our great admiration of the risk takers, who ultimately make our lives safer.

Alan Sexton, North Parramatta

Give the bush a break Just a thought: If there was an infectious outbreak in my regional area, would Sydney be locked down?

Of course not. So why are rural areas with no cases of COVID-19 still having to follow the same rules as the city?

Don't forget many rural areas have already been drastically affected by drought and bushfires and are in a bad way.

Premier, please let us get back to (sort of) normal!

Claire, Coonabarabran

Future proofing for Oz Well done to Australia and other countries that have banded together to look into the origin of COVID- 19 (ScoMo's COVID coup, 18/5).

At this time, China's bullying tactics have come to the fore as they threaten to suspend imports or put tariffs on goods that come from Australia.

The latest dummy spit on their part was not to even answer calls to discuss things.

It is a wake-up call to Australia and the rest of the world about China and its true intentions.

It's time to stop putting all our eggs in one basket, think outside the square and look at other markets to sell our goods.

Also, restarting our manufacturing industries, particularly with vital supplies, such as medical ones, could be a good start. This could be seen as an insurance policy for the future.

Joe Kovac, Prestons

History will pass judgment When the history of the 2020 coronavirus pandemic is written up Australia and New Zealand will be treated with merit (ScoMo's COVID coup, 18/5).

One man, one woman; one conservative government; one left-leaning government; all united in one purpose.

But, the analysis of China will be scathing.

However, 2020 might just be the catalyst that awakens that nation's 1.4 billion people and sets in motion change. People have to eat and it is certain those 1.4 billion will not be invited to the same table as the Communist Party elite.

Add the disgraceful insult to humanity China has displayed through its arrogance and the wheels of change might have just started to turn.

You've got to stay strong here PM - we are all in your corner on this. Warwick Egan, Umina Beach

We're not out of this yet Our new infections are very small now but each day I look at the recovered numbers and they just don't seem to be going down so much.

The recovery period is, in my reading, clearly a lot longer than a couple of weeks. Is it three weeks, four weeks, more?

And, just look at the McDonald's situation in Victoria. One case can affect dozens of employees and all their contacts.

Stay vigilant everybody, it's not over yet.

Garry Robinson, Mannering Park

Time is the enemy of truth While it appears that the demands for an independent and thorough investigation into the origins of the COVID-19 pandemic has finally found support from many other nations, it needs to happen pretty damn quick in my opinion (ScoMo's gang of 62, 18/5).

If China eventually acquiesces, it has had plenty of time to manipulate the data, eliminate evidence and enable a massive cover-up of vital information.

What occurs to me too, is the serious question of the total lack of appropriate support or indeed action by the very body which is supposedly responsible for the health of the world - the World Health Organisation.

Carol Cosham, Gymea Bay

Figures of substance Lots of people are, quite rightly, being thanked for all their hard work during the COVID-19 crisis.

One group that has been ignored and has been absolutely essential in flattening the curve are the mathematicians.

Thanks so much to this often maligned group.

We wouldn't know where we are without you, thanks for taking the work on the curve to the limit.

Peter, Cessnock

Now bump the bunker We just need one referee - and no NRL bunker (Interchange to entertain, 18/5). The bunker slows the game down too much, so get rid of it. Have two linesmen each side of the field and one each at the goalpost ends and make sure they know that they are paid to watch the game.

When a decision is to be made re a forward pass, try or no try etc they can confer with the referee. A decision is quickly made. Straight back to play.

Captains etc should not be allowed to question the decision. If they do so, send them off. They are there to play not to make decisions.

At the end of the season you will have won some and lost some but in the end all will be equal and we the spectators will be coming in droves to see a great and fast game.

Carmel Kennif, Randwick

Briefly …

With or without any inquiries or trade sanctions, the Chinese government has done enormous damage to the "Made in China" label.

Gary, Engadine.

"" " Come on premier, think outside the bureaucratic box. You can open the regional areas quicker than the metro. This one size fits all approach is so detrimental to the economy and the ever-reducing time frame to save small business.

Scott, Manly "" " This virus has put our country into unknown debt and problems but that's not enough for the loony Greens (Greens' dream dead on arrival, 18/5). If Labor/Greens get into power in the next 10 or more years we will never get out of debt.

Liz, Gosford

HAVE YOUR SAYMAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001