China's president backs review into coronavirus

CHINESE President Xi Jinping last night backed a comprehensive international review of the COVID-19 pandemic in a sensational diplomatic win for Australia.

The powerful leader told the World Health Assembly his country supported the idea, but only after the pandemic is "brought under control". The Morrison Government's push for an independent inquiry into the pandemic had been gaining momentum with 116 countries signed on to co-sponsor a draft resolution put forward by the European Union that included a motion calling for the review.

In an address to the virtual session of 194 countries, Mr Xi defended China's record on sharing information with the WHO, saying his nation had "done everything in our power to support and assist countries in need." He pledged $2 billion in funds over two years to help the global COVID-19 fight and proposed continued "research into source and transmission routes of the virus ... led by WHO and conducted in (an) objective and impartial manner".

"This may not be the last time a major health emergency comes knocking at our door," he said. "China supports the idea of a comprehensive review … after it is brought under control." Mr Xi said the virus "caught the world by surprise" and "I mourn for every life lost and express condolence for the bereaved families", adding: "The disease does not respect borders." "In China, after making painstaking efforts and enormous sacrifice, we have turned the tide on the virus and protected the life and health of our people." UN secretary general Antonio Guterres opened the event, saying "a microscopic virus has brought us to our knees." "When we have finally turned the page on this pandemic … there must be a time to look back," he said.

"Now is not that time, now is the time for the international community to work in solidarity.

"Either we get through this pandemic together or we fail." After helping to secure 116 countries to co-sponsor the draft resolution calling for the independent review and examination of the origins of COVID-19, the Morrison Government has renewed its push to beef-up the powers of the World Health Organisation. Health Minister Greg Hunt was expected to speak to the World Health Assembly overnight in favour of the draft resolution proposed by the European Union and highlight the need to bolster the power of officials to investigate new diseases.

"We need to learn the lessons from this pandemic and ensure we have the strongest possible global health architecture, with an enhanced ability to prevent and respond to future outbreaks," he was expected to say.

"This could include an examination of whether the WHO's mandate and powers, including around inspection, need to be strengthened to ensure WHO members have timely access to critical data." China denied WHO officials entry into Wuhan for almost a month after the first case of COVID-19 in December. It has remained reluctant to release detailed case data, but may now do so.