THE CHINESE EMBASSY HAS VOICED ITS DISPLEASURE WITH THE TELEGRAPH'S CORONAVIRUS COVERAGE. HERE TIM BLAIR RESPONDS TO THE CONCERNS

THE Daily Telegraph this week received a letter from the Australian Consulate General of the People's Republic of China, who took gentle issue with our excellent coverage of the coronavirus crisis.

Following is a point-by-point response to the Consulate General and China's communist dictatorship.

"Recently The Daily Telegraph has published a number of reports and opinions about China's response to COVID-19 that are full of ignorance, prejudice and arrogance." If a state-owned newspaper in China received this kind of complaint, subsequent days would involve journalists waking up in prison with their organs harvested.

"Tracing the origin of the virus is a scientific issue that requires professional, science-based assessment." Sure it does. How professional and science-based was the claim published on March 12 by China's foreign ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian that "it might be US Army who brought the epidemic to Wuhan"?

"The origin of the virus is still undetermined, and the World Health Organisation has named the novel coronavirus 'COVID-19'." The World Health Organisation also appointed Zimbabwean murderer Robert Mugabe as its Goodwill Ambassador, and declared on March 2 that the "stigma" of the coronavirus "is more dangerous than the virus itself". The World Health Organisation does a lot of stupid stuff.

"So what is the real motive behind your attempt to repeatedly link the virus to China and even stating that the novel coronavirus was 'made in China'?" Our motive is accuracy. That's why we don't link the virus to Bognor Regis or say it was "made in Panama".

"The people of Wuhan made a huge effort and personal sacrifice to stop the spread of the epidemic." Wuhan's Dr Li Wenliang indeed made a huge effort to warn people about the coronavirus outbreak. Then, as The New York Times reports: "In early January, he was called in by both medical officials and the police, and forced to sign a statement denouncing his warning as an unfounded and illegal rumor." And now he's dead, so that's "personal sacrifice" covered as well.

"Nevertheless … to capture attention and gain more internet hits, you called Wuhan the 'Zombieland' and Wuhan seafood market the 'bat market'. How low can you go?" In the civilised world, "Bradman bats and bats and bats" is a famous newspaper banner. In Wuhan, it's the name of a restaurant.

"The effectiveness of China's epidemic prevention and control has fully underlined the people-centred philosophy of the Communist Party of China and the strong advantages of the Chinese system." In 2018, Amnesty International reported that China executed more citizens than the rest of the world combined. Please tell us more about your "people-centred philosophy" and how many bullets it requires.

"Instead of admitting and facing facts, the articles in your newspaper have wantonly attacked and smeared the CPC and the Chinese government with vicious language." And yet we haven't been executed! Where's the justice in that? "Is your judgment based on the wellbeing of the people or do you have an ideological prejudice?" We will admit to an ideological prejudice against deadly tyranny. It's a tragic failing on our part.

"Since 3 January, China has been updating the WHO and the international community in a timely and transparent manner." On January 14, following 11 days of "timely and transparent" updates, the WHO broadcast this ridiculous Chinese misinformation: "Preliminary investigations conducted by the Chinese authorities have found no clear evidence of human-to-human transmission of the novel coronavirus." "The epidemic is spreading rapidly around the globe, and China is doing its utmost to support other severely affected countries." Thousands of Chinese-made coronavirus testing kits and medical masks exported to Spain, Turkey and the Netherlands turned out to be "below standard or defective", according to the BBC. And the ABC this week reported that more than 800,000 masks have been seized by Australian Border Force officers after being "found to be counterfeit or otherwise faulty". Thanks for all your help, guys.

"Virus respects no borders." Why, then, did China close its own borders on March 28 - even while claiming victory over the spread of coronavirus?

"You have repeatedly questioned the WHO's positive assessment of China's epidemic prevention and control, but surely you know that the WHO is the most authoritative international organisation in global public health, with more than 190 members including Australia?" Keep an eye on that number, sunshine.

"In disregard of the authoritative information provided by China and the WHO's professional opinions, you instead quoted several so-called 'strategic analysts' … were you aware that the institution where these people work have been exposed as long accepting financial support from the US government …?" The US last year contributed nearly $900 million to the holy WHO. Your point, sir?

"Your recent coverage on the epidemic in China are exaggerated, full of irresponsible rumours and highly politicised."Naughty us. Please send an official Dr Li Wenliang "unfounded and illegal rumour" denunciation statement so we can sign it and be on our way.