JAKE Trbojevic says younger brother Tom will be ready to go for the opening round of the NRL season after developing a new training regimen for his troublesome hamstrings.

Considered crucial to Manly's hopes of success, Tom Trbojevic and his dodgy hammies are set to be among the hottest topics of any countdown to the 2021 NRL season.

In the past two years, the Manly fullback has been restricted to just 19 games. Now back in training on the northern beaches, both brothers have been busy in the lead up to their Christmas break - for different reasons.

While Tom flew to Melbourne for further testing on his hamstrings a few weeks back, Jake has been attending fundraisers and helping promote Gotcha4Life, the mental fitness charity founded by Gus Worland.

Along with fellow NSW Origin star James Tedesco, the high-profile ambassadors are planning to get more hands-on with school visits and talks in the new year as restrictions around the NRL bubble are set to be eased.

While Jake is still on a break after an arduous State of Origin campaign, Tom is looking to regain the form that first earned him a Blues start thanks to a new pre-season program involving input from Melbourne specialists.

After a third hamstring tear against Canberra Raiders in May, both Trbojevic and recruit Kieran Foran were sent to Melbourne a few weeks ago for further testing.

Asked how the trip had gone, Jake said the testing had shown everything was "great" while adding specialists had also provided new training methods for the fullback to trial.

"Tommy will be good for the first game," the Sea Eagles backrower said. "And he's been working extremely hard to get himself right. I know the past couple of years have been frustrating. Especially given how hard he works to stay out there on the field.

"But the testing says it's all great. Even recently, he went to Melbourne and saw some specialists to get further testing done.

"And they've given him some new training methods and different things. "So, despite having had some bad luck, he's young; still only 24. "Tom has a long time left in the NRL. He just needs a little good fortune now. That's what everyone wants to see." Already well known for his community work, Trbojevic has joined Tedesco as an ambassador for Gotcha4Life.

The Sea Eagles favourite, who is close mates with Worland, said he was keen to be involved with the charity, pointing to new research revealing one in 10 Australians have contemplated suicide due to COVID-19's impact on their mental wellbeing.

"During the lockdown, a lot of people really felt like they were on their own," Trbojevic said. "So, the key message is making sure people aren't worrying alone. We want people to look after each other. Have deeper relationships.

"And, yes, that can be a little awkward at times. But it's so important to have those deeper conversations with people who might need to be helped out. "The statistics show it's a big problem within the community and I'm happy to come on board and do whatever I can to assist."