Wake up and accept the needle Immunisation is a global health success story, saving millions of lives every year.

We now have vaccines to prevent more than 20 life-threatening diseases like influenza and measles.

It is shattering to read that 6 per cent of Australians definitely won't get any COVID-19 vaccine when it becomes available (Anti-vax may keep virus alive 21/11).

To make matters worse, large numbers are hesitant or haven't made up their minds.

The situation puts at risk hope that the vaccine will effectively end the pandemic.

It is further frustrating as two recent vaccine trials were reported to be more than 90 per cent effective.

Time is of the essence and we need to convince the doubters to rethink this issue through education.

Peter Penglis, Kambah, Act

"" " Kylie Lang (Don't let anti-vax loonies ruin our COVID recovery, 21/11) is absolutely right.

Just one "loony" refusing the "jab" could imperil hundreds of others who have yet to be vaccinated or who are in the 5 per cent for whom the vaccine has proved ineffective.

With an enemy that is so tiny yet deadly, and can multiply so rapidly, we cannot afford to leave uncovered the slightest chink in our anti-COVID armour. The consequences could be fatal.

Douglas Mackenzie, Deakin, ACT

"" " Put those who refuse the COVID vaccine into permanent lockdown. If they want to be selfish they need to be kept away from us, the inoculated.

Liz, Gosford War zone dangers and expectations a major issue As former Special Forces officer Heston Russell states in his article, "you don't read about what we had to do to support alliances and put ourselves at risk to maintain the situation in Afghanistan" (They all wanted to look at kill counts, 22/11).

Our soldiers were sent by Australia into a seriously dangerous war zone where the enemy didn't play by any rule book and where rules of engagement and outcomes were blurred.

The four-year inquiry, and now a special investigation, will result in Australia being targeted in future terrorist activities and undermine our response to them.

The standards set and the opinions expressed so far by our leaders are not helpful in this regard and many veterans are suffering.

Hopefully this special investigation will consider that our soldiers were sent into this danger by our government and defence leaders.

So where should the buck stop?

Peter Cattlin, Freshwater

Fears for defence future I have to pledge my full support to SAS men and women who serve in a war zone. I firmly believe these men and women are worn down by continuous deployment and having to face up to pure evil time and time again.

The worst of it is not over for them when they arrive home - they still have to battle bureaucracy over alleged war crimes.

Sure, these allegations have to be dealt with, but internally, not in the media. My greatest fear is who will protect us when terrorists come knocking at our door because no one sees a future in our defence forces.

David Penn, NSW

A big thank you, Terry A huge thank you to The Daily Telegraph business columnist Terry McCrann for his brilliant and fearless exposure of the deceit imposed on the Australian people by those in government, regardless of which political party is in power.

The latest issue he has highlighted is the move to replace a one-off property tax with a lifetime of perpetual property tax through unconscionable, unashamed, pure deception (Does NSW have a new tax for all, 20/11).

It is becoming extremely difficult to pick a party of choice during elections as the similarity between the major parties is astounding.

Saul Moss, Hamlyn Terrace

Koala care still a priority I am not sure about the latest moves in state parliament regarding koalas (Koala war is over & gum, 21/11).

I do hope our politicians are thinking of the koalas and not just the dollars. Our politicians have not passed the pub test often in the past. I have been camping many times when we have come across a inquisitive koala. They are very beautiful animals, especially the inquisitive ones. I would hate to only be able to see them in animal parks and zoos. Morty, Moruya

A gift great & grand I think the Queen and the Duke, like most grandparents and great grandparents, were very happy with the anniversary card made by Prince George, Princess Charlotte and Prince Louis (Anniversary gift for the Queen, 21/11).

They must be the most difficult of people to buy a gift for, but the card was priceless.

Being married for 73 years would also pose a problem. Which gem or precious metal would signify such a long time together? Such a milestone.

Marg Swindells, Castle Hill

Power of Maroon madness OK, can we stop with the Wayne Bennett coaching accolades; if he is that good, why hasn't he won a premiership since 2010?

The real reason is this Queenslander thing - in their minds they really are unconquerable at anything they do to the extent you could probably call it a disease, but they call it passion.

Woe betide any vehicle with NSW number plates at Origin time. They are tooted, cut off, abused and jammed. I know all this because I live among it and I'm Blue.

Jack Jackson, Burleigh Heads Building leadership a key Referring to the story detailing how 185 kids have been suspended from class in one school this year, we must ask why.

Is it lack of discipline training at home, in society or at school? There are too many kids out of control and in fights, rudeness is common, as is other disruptive behaviour.

This is a complex situation, however, students need to be encouraged to learn self-discipline.

Discipline is important in social development as well as for making their way in future lifestyle and working environments.

Being poor, socially disadvantaged or coming from an abusive environment may be factors, however, nonconformists are common across all school situations.

Suspension centres should be a last resort, but school rules and discipline are fundamental to school spirit and children bonding.

Student leadership promotion should start in primary school and be strengthened through high school.

Students and teachers should be encouraged in setting standards/rules to make a safe, anti-bullying, enjoyable educational environment.

Ron Brown, Ballina

Briefly ...

Dear China, if standing up for our freedoms and sovereignty offends you, good. If you think that we are going to apologise to you there's an old Australian saying: You're dreaming.

Dazza, Singleton "" " I for one will never consider buying a house that has moved to this new and improved property tax (Does NSW have a new tax for all, 20/11). Cap it at 20 years and then maybe.

Grant Paterson, Katoomba "" " Thank God I don't live in America. Democrat Joe Biden is to the left of our Greens Party and I believe will lead the western world to disaster - the same as the Greens would do to Australia if they somehow gained control.

Shaun Green, Hornsby "" " So any charges against SAS soldiers will likely take years to finalise, if ever. Meanwhile, everyone who served is left under a cloud.

Sean, Merriwa

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001