FORMER SURF STAR AND KNIGHTS TRAGIC MATT HOY CAN'T WAIT TO WATCH SON TEX DEBUT FOR THE CLUB, WRITES NICK WALSHAW NOBODY is willing rugby league back quite like Matt Hoy. Which is some claim, right? Especially now, only hours away from the most hyped of NRL relaunches.

It's a stunning Aussie sports resurrection which, apart from finally allowing Peter V'landys to sleep again, will revive jobs, rivers of money, Super Saturday and, importantly for some, bring an end to footballers choreographing Tic Toc videos.

But for Hoyo, it means something more again.

Greater, even, than a Bells Beach title for this famed Newcastle surfer who also loves his footy as much as you'd expect a fella who not only won eight straight premierships as a kid, but counts Andrew Johns and Danny Buderus among his mates.

A Knights fanatic, you might say, right down to that club emblem inked on his left ankle.

Indeed, remember in 2000, when the Knights famously lost that preliminary final against the Roosters after leading 16-2 at the break?

Well, Hoyo still has the No.7 jersey Joey threw away afterwards. "Wear it to every game too," he laughs.

"I'm not even sure if it really is the jumper Joey tossed away that night, but I've been told it is and I'm going with it." Which is why Hoyo is like so many footy fans right now.

Together, all of us having counted down the months, weeks, days and now - gasp - hours until we can again cheer James Tedesco in space, Josh Papalii in traffic, Origin, Tommy Turbo, the Fergy Ferg backflip, the Benji Step, Cronulla Mermaids, the Viking Clap, Golden point and, eventually, Leichhardt Oval hot dogs.

For some, a resurrected NRL means South Sydney's Latrell Mitchell under that first high ball - and every one thereafter.

While for others, it will be the story that is Valentine Holmes in Townsville, Nathan Cleary at Penrith or whatever can still be squeezed from Canterbury playmaker Kieran Foran.

Elsewhere, you have the Roosters chasing a threepeat from 12th, the Warriors looking to prove themselves to be more than the team that saved a code, while Parramatta need only to break a title drought stretching 34 years.

Truly, the reasons for wanting rugby league back are everywhere. But Hoyo?

He just wants to see his boy play.

Which by our reckoning, makes his the greatest of them all.

And why sometime in the next 48 hours, NRL types should test this proud dad for COVID-19, clear him, then provide special access to Campbelltown Stadium so that on Sunday afternoon he can watch son Tex make his top-grade debut against Penrith in the Newcastle No.1 jersey.

Certainly, the old boy has waited long enough.

"Oh, it's the longest lead-up to a debut ever," Hoy agrees.

"Most young blokes get told on Tuesday they'll be debuting that weekend. It's nice and quick.

"But with Tex, I think we've known for about eight or nine weeks now. As soon as Kalyn Ponga got suspended we knew, basically.

"Which would have to make it an NRL record for waiting, I reckon." Better, it's nothing like the story dad, or anyone else, expected. Especially when you learn that while Tex may be the son of an Aussie surf favourite, you could count on one hand the number of times this 20-year-old has actually ridden a stick.

"First time I took Tex surfing, he was eight," the old man recalls. "Got straight up too, riding a couple of waves for 100m.

"But then afterwards, he looked at me and said 'dad, is that it?'. "I said 'ah, mate, yeah it is'.

"So that was the finish of it ... Tex said he wasn't surfing again." Which must've hurt a little, right?

"Ah, a little, yeah," Hoy says.

"When I was young, my old man always took me surfing, which I thought was amazing.

"But there's no point trying to set your kids on a path.

"You have to let them go do what they want.

"And the way Tex is doing that, I couldn't be prouder." Of course, while yet to play an NRL game, the story of Tex Hoy is already well told.

Most of League Land is well aware of this livewire Knights prodigy who, after signing on with the club aged 14, starred at this year's NRL Nines and now lives with Connor Watson and Kalyn Ponga - the latter of whom he will replace in the backline against Penrith.

Able to play fullback or five-eighth, Hoy not only has the competitive instincts of his old man, and the calmness one learns from being raised among Green Room Gods, but the skills that come with private tutorials from a future Immortal.

Can you imagine it?

Weekends, playing footy in the backyard while being tipped up by Joey, Bedsey and some of the other greatest leaguies who ever lived.

At which point, though, we should also mention Hoy Sr played eight years of junior league - winning eight straight premierships.

"Although, we had Adam Muir for a lot of those years," he laughs in reference to the retired NSW and Australian forward. "So I certainly wasn't the shining light." But still, you'll be claiming Tex as a chip off the 'ol block, right? "Well, he's about to make his first grade debut," Hoy says. "So of course I'm going to say that.

"And I can claim it, can't I?

"I know people always think, being a surfer, I was laid-back. "And while I was no athlete, I've always been as competitive as the next person." Which is why on the eve of this NRL resurrection, no yarn about rugby league returning tops this proud dad who will finally get to see the son he loves represent the club he loves in the game he loves.

In short, bloody fantastic.

"Although the story has nothing to do with me," Hoy insists. "Everything Tex has, he's earnt himself.

"Thankfully, he doesn't take after me, either. Tex takes after his mum, who is mellow and happy being a homebody.

"So he's always been a good kid, never got in any trouble ." OK, but what about that whisper suggesting he once broke your hand in a backyard game of footy?

"That's a Matty Johns story," Hoy laughs.

So your suggesting a 10 per cent GST has been added?

"Absolutely a GST has been thrown on there," the old man says. "There was no broken hand.

"Although Tex probably did jam me in a tackle. That part would be correct." If the NRL offers no special clearance for the Hoy family this Sunday, dad says he will be watching on from the lounge room at home, can of VB in hand.

"Can't wait, either," he says. "For Tex to play NRL, it's great. "And to also be debuting for the family's hometown team, the club we all support, I'm so stoked for him. "Or at least I will be … when he finally gets out there."