Legacy of a man right for his times As James Morrow's brilliantly measured article rightly alluded to, the central issue with the Victorian deputy chief health officer's careless Twitter post is not that of free speech, but that of poor timing and historical inaccuracy - indeed, the First Fleet sailed into Botany Bay almost 10 years after the death of James Cook in Hawaii (The case for Cook, Saturday Extra, 2/5).

There is also a more significant, perhaps uncomfortable, elephant in the room, which needs to be addressed: Australian citizens - whether of European, indigenous, Asian or other heritage - appreciate and desire the fruits of European settlement.

The majority of us greatly appreciate such social facets as our rule of law, modern medicine, just governance, police force and public schooling; in short, the civil blessings birthed through the propagation of Western culture.

For better or worse, the Endeavour's arrival in 1770 set in motion a cultural chain of events which today are encapsulated in what Noel Pearson accurately affirmed two years ago in his Declaration of Australia; the three strands of our grand social narrative: an indigenous foundation, British institutions and a modern-day multicultural character.

As we continue to civilly appraise our past and navigate our future, we need to reserve a space for acknowledging how much of our present-day state of affairs are due to the extraordinary naval achievements and academic acquirements of a man who was just right for the time.

Peter Waterhouse, Craigieburn, Vic

China report welcomed I live in the United States and just read your report on the coronavirus case against China (China's risky bat business, 2/5).

Thank you for saying what had to be said. Some of the press in the United States and some in Europe dare not stand up to China.

Even my 17-year-old son agrees wholeheartedly with your report. Go Australia. May, USA

Let's keep downloading it Clare Armstrong's report on Saturday quotes statistics that (as of the time of writing) 3.6 million people had downloaded the COVIDSafe app. The article also states that 6.8 million people have received a one-off payment of $750 thus far (Appy days to be free at last, 2/5).

That is a difference of 3.2 million people who have gladly taken the $750 handout but have not done the right thing by downloading the app to help save lives Perhaps if you don't want to download it for whatever reason, you should demonstrate your displeasure and give back the $750 in protest?

Any takers? Didn't think so!

Further, if you take the $1500 jobseeker payment or any other leg- up from the government, then it's a tad hypocritical to bite the hand that feeds you by not heeding the calls to help get our lives back on track.

Do the right thing. Get Australia moving again. Download the COVIDSafe app, get over yourself and whatever Big Brother or woke nonsense you bang on about and think of others, OK.

John Partridge, Manly

We're still in the Hunt I have always admired Greg Hunt a good bloke with integrity, respect and a calm and calming demeanour, especially when he was spectacularly betrayed recently by Andrew Forrest at his COVID update press conference.

Now to learn of his childhood trauma growing up with his bipolar mother it makes me like and respect him even more.

And to think we could have lost him to politics when Julia Banks contested his seat at the last election, well done Flinders voters you re-elected a truly great man.

Marg Swindells, Castle Hill

Trust starts with the home The government want us to trust them with the COVIDSafe app yet here we have a senior cabinet member, Peter Dutton, Minister for Home Affairs (not his own), failing to declare a million-dollar property in Townsville on the pecuniary interest register required for our elected members of parliament (Dutton's million-dollar 'mistake', 2/5).

How many times do we have to hear from politicians that it was an oversight, common mistake, or the other one - of human error.

You would think, with so many previous problems for politicians, that Mr Dutton would get his own home affairs in order first.

Perhaps we might be able to trust them on this app but not their own investments.

Ian Cleland, Blackett

Crazy signs in crazy times Look out people, the weirdos are coming out of hibernation.

We have a foolish, misinformed bureaucrat comparing Cook's landing to COVID-19, overpaid footballers chucking tantrums over their too generous pays.

We have had some Australians appearing to put the People's Republic of China ahead of the concerns of our country, and just as we look at kickstarting our struggling economy, along comes a misguided independent politician trying to block the much-needed Narrabri gas project, along with other developments that we desperately need in these trying times. We also seem to have the teachers union reluctant to get kids back to school. Crazy people and crazy times.

But, on another note, hats off to Penny Wong for publicly backing Scott Morrison's wishes for an independent inquiry into the origin and spread of this deadly disease. Nice to see a Labor Party member with common sense!

Munzy, Singleton

Backlash will only get worse With China continuing to deny the world the opportunity to conduct an independent inquiry into the source of coronavirus and making threats on trade to those countries that criticise them the backlash against them will continue to escalate.

The longer China adopts this stance the more suspicion of culpability will be raised and the more the world will lose respect for them. It is not just Australia that is calling them to task - the world is lining up behind our Prime Minister's call.

John Spackman, Kyogle

Put end to science links Immediately, there should be no Chinese scientists working on exchange in Australia (China's batty science, 2/5).

These scientists are people who obviously enjoy scientific pursuit and are probably honest individuals. However, they answer, when the Chinese Communist Party directs them, in whatever way it wants.

Paul McMurray, Epping

Distancing on the roads The people of the ACT have done remarkably well with social distancing with the COVID-19 cases well in hand.

All we need now is to apply the same concept to the driving population and their world champion status as tailgaters.

With the best roads in the country, it's a too common sight to see in your rear view mirror the wild stares and white knuckles a couple of metres from your rear bumper.

If tailgating was an Olympic sport Canberra would win gold, silver and bronze. Bruce Collison, Banks, ACT

Briefly … The shocking abuse and attacks on Asian Australians during the coronavirus pandemic is a blot on the nation's multiracialism and democracy. All right-thinking Australians must stand together to combat this racist virus.

R Naidu, Glenfield "" " Once this is all over, will the government be prepared for the influx of mature age students seeking to job re-train - as teachers?

Jim, Springwood "" " It is interesting to hear that Korean leader Kim Jong-un has been seen at a fertiliser factory, as the rumours of his possible death had a smell of horse manure.

Dennis Fitzgerald, Box Hill, Vic

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily TelegraphGPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001