Knights' Origin star victim of repeated head blows THE football career of Queensland Maroons and Newcastle Knights forward Tim Glasby is over, with the NRL approving his medical retirement on the basis of repeated -concussions.

The hard-working State of Origin forward was notified last week of the NRL's decision to ratify his retirement on medical grounds after two months of assessing his case. Glasby will retire as a tough and influential forward for both the Knights and his previous club, Melbourne Storm, with his career featuring a premiership ring from 2017 and 138 first-grade appearances.

News Sport first revealed the serious concerns for Glasby's playing future and more importantly his health in July after the 31-year-old father of two had suffered ongoing concussion symptoms from repeated head knocks.

Glasby's final game was against North Queensland, where he suffered a HIA and failed to return to the field during the Round 7 clash in June.

It was his second concussion this year while Glasby was stood down for a game last year after suffering two head knocks in three weeks.

As a result of the concussion against the Cowboys, Glasby underwent a series of neurological tests.

He visited the Sports Concussion Clinic at the University of Newcastle, working with leading neurologist Chris Levi.

With the respected forward's welfare their priority, the Knights informed the NRL of their request to formally apply for medical retirement in July.

It's understood Glasby, who played five State of Origin games for the Maroons, is comfortable with the decision to retire and in the knowledge that by putting his health first, he can focus on his post-football career path as a financial planner.

The Rockhampton junior, who made his NRL debut in 2013 with the Storm before going on to win the 2017 premiership with Melbourne, will remain inside the Knights COVID-19 "bubble" for the rest of the season with his big-game experience required to help guide the club into the first finals series in seven years.

Glasby was off-contract at the end of next season and while his premature retirement is unfortunate, his departure will provide salary cap room for the Knights to retain several off-contract stars, or recruit externally.

TIM GLASBY'S KNOCKS August 31, 2018: Round 25: Playing for Storm v Penrith. Ruled out by half-time due to concussion August 12, 2019: Round 21: Knights v Eels. Stood down for one week suffering two knocks in three weeks May 31, 2020: Round 3: Knights v Penrith returns from HIA to play 60-minutes June 27, 2020: Round 7: Knights v Cowboys lasts just 21-mins after failing HIA June 28-July 19, 2020: Unavailable for selection