Wokesters: we don't care a Bean WELL done Rowan Atkinson in calling out the cancel culture and woke whingers (Cancel culture's no joke, 7/1). It reminds us that the minority seems to get everything they want, just like spoilt children chucking a tantrum until they get their way.

 They see their opinion as the only one that matters, and no discussion can be entered into. There is an old saying: "Empty vessels make the most sound." It is time for the majority to stand up and speak up, otherwise we will end up as a humourless, boring, downtrodden society too scared to say or do anything in case it might be misinterpreted or offend someone.

Joe Kovac, Prestons

WHAT many followers in the cancel culture mob rampaging through Australian, British and American history don't understand is that many of the people they would erase from history were the equivalent of today's progressive, woke and creative culture (Cancel culture's no joke, 7/1).

 It's also pertinent to note that it's not the names of those involved in the lynching that survive, it is their victims.

Bruce Collison, Banks, ACT

Christmas Island stay should be cut short For those who are sick of being in detention at Christmas Island, you only have yourselves to blame for being there (Christmas Island detainees set fires, run riot at centre, 7/1).

 If you didn't break the law you wouldn't be there, but you chose differently.  Peter Dutton and Scott Morrison can fix the problem by putting them all on the first planes out of here back to their country of origin.

 Mr Dutton needs to act swiftly to have them out of this country and have their families pay for the damages they've caused.

Narelle, Sydney

You read it here It is uncanny how the rise of the cancel culture and the notion of personal disinvestment is reflected so fore-tellingly in George Orwell's political prophecy novel, 1984 (Cancel culture's no joke, 7/1).

 The idea that people, including comedians, celebrities and other personalities are boycotted, or censored, essentially because of something they said or did within a past historical context, talks to the manner in which Orwell saw the mob-ruled culture maintaining power through "two-minute hate" periods where citizens were encouraged to publicly express their hatred for perceived enemies.

 I think the novel should be compulsory reading at schools.

Dr Jack Dikian, Mosman

Keeper laughter alive I totally agree that minorities are attempting to silence humour (Cancel culture's no joke, 7/1).

 I recall an episode of the Simpsons sending up Australia and our way of life - not one complaint, we laughed with the Yanks till our sides split.

 But making bad comments about a single person and attempting to demoralise that person at work or pleasure is a different story.

Peter Coote, Kings Park

It's a jumbo problem Well, Robert Irwin certainly created a kerfuffle by flying in a helicopter too low over a Tasmanian National Park (Crikey! That's a bit low, 7/1).  One must now wonder what furore will eventuate when hundreds of jumbo passenger planes will be skimming over our World Heritage Blue Mountains National Park during take-offs and landings.  The outcome will be deafening.

Alex Uren, Canowindra

Flight of fancy It seems the Tasmanian Wilderness is for the exclusive enjoyment of bushwalkers (Crikey! That's a bit low, 7/1).

 Bushwalker Meredith Thurstans is quoted saying: "It's just not on. You don't walk for three days and expect some peace and quiet then be buzzed by a helicopter." I hope she takes all her waste, including human, with her.

John Stuart, St Fillans

One for the road If drivers obeyed speed limits and current road rules and regulations, what is the issue whether mobile speed cameras are marked or unmarked (Letters, 7/1)? Obviously, common sense and responsibility no longer exist.

 These are also missing from other aspects of everyday life. David Crawford, Gwynneville

WHO? Why? Where?

China is blocking World Health Organisation investigators from entering the country (WHO's the boss? China blocks COVID team, 7/1). Why would this matter now? It is too late.

 The Chinese have had ample time to reshape Wuhan, remove evidence, even reprogram people. I think physically visiting Wuhan now is meaningless. It was all clear from day one that the virus was Chinese. We need to move on.

Mokhles K. Sidden, South Strathfield

Inspector hex If the Chinese government won't let WHO health inspectors visit the country, they must have something to hide (WHO's the boss? China blocks COVID team, 7/1).

 We could have found out where this COVID-19 virus originated. George Orban, Breakfast Point

Page turner Yesterday's Daily Telegraph sent me from laughing to tears in the turn of a page. Rowan Atkinson dressed in a Nazi uniform looked hilarious (Cancel Culture's no joke, 7/1), then turning the page to those two young boys killed in Wellington (Killed in 'idiot act', 7/1) was heartbreaking.

Gary McClean, Gymea

Mind over matter We have a worldwide pandemic which is causing deaths and a huge amount of infections. We are fearful of going out to shopping centres and restaurants. We are mindful of social distancing, washing our hands and wearing masks. We have people who have lost their jobs. Some businesses have gone bust. The travel industry is in tatters. The words "hotspots" and "clusters" have taken on new meaning. Our national debt is out of the ballpark. We've lived through arguably one of the worst years in history.

 Now we find that Lara Worthington is happy with her body (Mum's the word in body battle, 7/1).

How good is that?

Marg Swindells, Castle Hill

Just for openers What about Will Pucovski our new opening batsman for Australia?  For his young age he has shown in the 3rd Test that he has great concentration, determination and patience. Will, I can see you becoming one of our great batsmen.

 It is great to see one so young showing immense knowledge in his batting style.  Go Will, we will be watching you for years to come.

Barry, Hallidays Point

Briefly … ABC journalists and political commentators remind me very much of Donald Trump. Neither can acknowledge that a new government has been elected and has a clear mandate from the people.

John Partridge, Manly

* * * Just wondering if the government will use the new laws being legislated - trolling, bullying or offending anyone online - against the cancel culture clique. Give us back the right to choose what we watch.

Pat Murphy, Ermington

* * * Last year, crippling droughts and bushfires. This year, floods. I believe we're going to be $300bn in the hole because of COVID. Can't we cough up $10bn to build John Bradfield's dam system? He was a very clever bloke. Just do it!

Bill, Gosford

* * * As an avid reader of The Daily Telegraph for 50 years, I read the headline story then go to the Letters as it's good to read other's points of view, and Warren's cartoon puts a smile on my face. Next I read the obituary column and if my name is not there, I make a cup of tea and have a good day.

Ron, Granville

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001