The NRL clubs hold the whip hand in player negotiations as the world health pandemic and doubts over the salary cap make it a buyer's market, writes Fatima Kdouh

Almost 100 off-contract players' futures remain uncertain - including Josh Addo-Carr, Benji Marshall and the Morris twins - as they prepare to flood the open market at the end of the season as the COVID-19 pandemic creates a buyer's market for clubs.

Most NRL clubs aren't rushing to sign free agents and fill the spots in their 30 rosters for next season.

It means many off-contract players face a nervous wait over the summer. The NRL and RLPA have agreed in-principle to retain clubs' 30-man rosters for 2021, with two to four development players, and have advised clubs to work towards that number.

However, a looming reduction in the salary cap will trigger a flurry of off-season movement - meaning as well as free agents, a host of contracted players are likely to have new clubs for 2021.

"It really is a buyer's market at the moment with all the uncertainty," one NRL player manager said.

"Clubs are saying 'this is what we are offering, take it or leave it'. Then you have players who, because of COVID, haven't been able to play reserve grade this year." Warriors recruitment guru Peter O'Sullivan said the uncertainty around the make-up of next season's squad sizes had left clubs wary ahead of the usual off-season transfer frenzy.

"The mooted change to the roster size from 30 has led to clubs being conservative in approaching the market," O'Sullivan said.

"But I don't think roster sizes should be in any way decreased. You look at the numbers clubs have had to use this year, it's far in excess of 30 so you can't decrease it. That is only going to exacerbate the problem or the struggle that these free agents are facing to secure their future." Further muddying the waters is the lack of a second tier, with both the NSW and Queensland Cup competitions called off for 2020.

"There are some good players that I haven't seen play in over a year, so making decisions on those players is difficult enough and if you haven't seen them play it makes it impossible to sign them," O'Sullivan said.

"It's a matter of out of sight, out of mind. The big thing for me over the years has been watching the NSW and Queensland Cup semi-finals because the best players in that arena are first graders. Players like Lachlan Burr played at the Bulldogs and was part of their grand final-winning side two years ago and was the best player through that grand final series. Toby Rudolf is in that same boat. Without reserve grade you don't see players like that so you can't sign them."

THE GREAT Melbourne captain Cameron Smith, the NRL's record holder for most games, headlines an unprecedented free agency list as he contemplates retirement or creating a tug-of-war between the Storm and the Brisbane Broncos.

While Smith is likely to retire, his final decision will have a direct impact on the futures of Storm pair Brandon Smith and Harry Grant. After a breakthrough season at Wests Tigers, Grant and would not be prepared to wait for an opportunity at Melbourne. Brandon Smith has made it clear he sees himself as an 80-minute hooker. If forced to play second fiddle to Grant, he could be on a lookout for a new home, with the likes of Canterbury keen.

ORIGIN STAR Josh Addo-Carr, who remains contracted to Melbourne until the end of 2021, is desperate to return to Sydney on compassionate grounds.

But things are at a standstill because the Storm will only release him if they can land a suitable replacement for the NSW Origin winger.

While the Wests Tigers' interest in electric winger Addo-Carr appears to have cooled, South Sydney is being mooted as an option, depending on the future of teenage sensation Joseph Suaalii.

SONS OF GUNS Rising playmaker Tristan Sailor is set to make the biggest decision of his young career.

The Daily Telegraph understands Parramatta are interested in Sailor, the son of former Broncos and Wallabies legend Wendell Sailor. But the Eels will have to fend off interest from at least two other clubs, including Canterbury and Wests Tigers. Sailor, who headlines a list of almost 100 players unsigned for season 2021 after being let go by St George Illawarra, has emerged as one of the hottest free agents on the market.

Cooper Johns: The son of Matthew Johns made his NRL debut in Round 20 and is likely to stay at Melbourne in season 2021.

Albert and Jamil Hopoate: The sons of Manly legend John Hopoate are facing very different future prospects. While Jamil's future at Brisbane is uncertain, Albert is in negotiations to stay at Manly but the Warriors are keeping a close eye on proceedings.

YOUNG & RESTLESS With next season's $9.9 million salary cap to shrink anywhere between five to 10 per cent, players who are likely to make up the last five places in the top 30 roster are facing the prospect of accepting less money.

Alex Seyfarth: The Tigers are at risk of letting another talented youngster slip through their fingers in the same fashion the club lost Ryan Papenhuyzen, Addo-Carr, James Tedesco and Aaron Woods. The under-18s and 20s NSW Blues forward is in negotiations but the Concord club is yet to lock him in for 2021.

Adam Keighran: The Roosters have shown some early interest in the New Zealand Warriors five-eighth but talks are not likely to progress until after the finals series.

Danny Levi: The former Newcastle and Manly hooker, who has played 103 NRL games, has fielded interest from several Sydney clubs but is yet to receive a formal offer for season 2021.

THE HIGH-PROFILE STARS Jordan Rapana: It is understood the flyer had leapfrogged Addo-Carr as a target at the Tigers but now looks set to stay in Canberra.

Benji Marshall: The Tigers great generated interest from two non-Sydney outfits and has a full-time Fox League gig on the table but is likely to make a decision about his future in the next two weeks.

Josh and Brett Morris: The veteran backs are both eager to play on in season 2021 and the Roosters are just as keen to have them on the roster.

ON THE FRINGE It is understood Parramatta is set to farewell forward David Gower, while the future of the club's longest current-serving player, Peni Terepo, is unclear as he deals with health issues around epilepsy.

Nathan Peats: The former NSW Blues hooker won't be at the Gold Coast in 2021 and could be a target for Bulldogs coach Trent Barrett, who is searching for a playmaker and to add more experience to his roster.

Richie Kennar: The centre has a place in new Brisbane coach Kevin Walter's roster but is testing the market before making a final call.

Drew Hutchison: The 25-year played five games in an injury-ravaged Roosters outfit in season 2020. While there is a chance Hutchinson remains at Bondi, the playmaker is open to joining another rival where there would be more opportunities to play regular first grade.

Cameron King: The Sharks hooker will return from an ACL injury next year for the Townsville Blackhawks after agreeing to join the Intrust Super Cup outfit.

NORTHERN LIGHTS Manly's Joel Thompson and Greg Inglis have signed contracts to play in England, while Eels playmaker Jai Field also looks to have secured a deal overseas, where the speedster is set to link up with the Wigan Warriors.

Ricky Leutele: Melbourne have shown interest in keeping the premiership-winning centre but any decision will be delayed until Toronto Wolfpack, where Leutele is contracted, has its own future sorted.

PLAYERS OFF CONTRACT IN 2020 BRONCOS Jamil Hopoate, Jordan Kahu, Richie Kennar, Rhys Kennedy, Issac Luke, Sean O'Sullivan, Ben Te'o, Ilikena Vudogo.

CANBERRA Sebastian Kris, Michael Oldfield, Jordan Rapana, Kurt Baptiste.

CANTERBURY Jack Cogger, Tim Lafai, Marcelo Montoya, Aiden Tolman, Sauaso Sue, Isaiah Tass.

CRONULLA Mawene Hiroti, Kayleb Milne, Scott Sorensen, Brayden Trindall.

GOLD COAST Dale Copley, Keegan Hipgrave, Nathan Peats, Tyrone Roberts, Sam Stone.

MANLY Albert Hopoate, Luke Metcalf, Samuel Smith, Danny Levi, Brendan Elliott, Tony Williams.

KNIGHTS Brodie Jones, Josh King, Mason Lino, Tautau Moga, Tyronne Roberts-Davis, Connor Watson.

PARRAMATTA Rhys Davies, David Gower, George Jennings, Jaeman Salmon, Will Smith, Brad Takairangi, Peni Terepo.

SYDNEY ROOSTERS Jake Friend, Drew Hutchison, Matt Ikuvalu, Lachlan Lam, Brett Morris, Josh Morris, Sonny Bill Williams.

PANTHERS Caleb Aekins, Dean Blore, Tyrone May, Braydon McGrady, Malakai Watene-Zelezniak.

ST GEORGE ILLAWARRA Jacob Host, Joe Lovodua, Tristan Sailor, Kaide Ellis.

WESTS TIGERS Sam McIntyre, Alex Seyfarth, Benji Marshall, Oliver Clark, Matt Eisenhuth, Elijah Taylor, Robert Jennings, Dylan Smith.

SOUTH SYDNEY Tom Amone, Cory Denniss, Kurt Dillon, Patrick Mago, Ky Rodwell.

WARRIORS Lachlan Burr, Patrick Herbert, Gerald Beale, Nathaniel Roache, Leivaha Pulu, Adam Keighran, Isaiah Papali'i, Peta Hiku, King Vuniyayawa.

NORTH QUEENSLAND John Asiata, Tom Opacic, Daniel Russell, Javid Bowen.

STORM Josh Addo-Carr (contracted until 2021 but negotiating a release), Sandor Earl, Cooper Johns, Max King, Brenko Lee, Ricky Leutele, Marion Seve, Cameron Smith, Christian Welch.

GRAND TOTAL: 97