Australia leads calls for global inquiry into 'cover-up' BLAME GAME

CHINA'S secrecy and early attempts to downplay the coronavirus outbreak would be scrutinised in an independent global inquiry into the pandemic demanded by Australia.

The Morrison government is leading the international call for an independent review of the COVID-19 crisis to determine the origin of the virus and if more could have been done to slow its spread.

Foreign Minister Marise Payne (inset) said transparency - particularly from the Chinese government - would be "key" to any review.

"An independent review would identify for us (facts) about the genesis of the virus, about the approaches to dealing with it, and addressing it about the openness with which information was shared," she said.

"(And) about interaction with the World Health Organisation … with other international leaders.

"All of those sorts of things will need to be on the table." Ms Payne said every country would need to agree to a mechanism for the review, but argued it should not be done by the WHO as its own activities would likely be assessed.

"We've been able to do those sorts of things in the past for key independent reviews, often on egregious human rights issues, for example," she said.

"But it will need parties and countries to come to the table with a willingness to be transparent and to engage in that process, and also ensure that we have a review mechanism in which the international community can have faith." On Friday China revised its death toll for the city of Wuhan - ground zero of the outbreak - to 3869 fatalities, almost 50 per cent higher than previously reported. According to Chinese state media, these deaths were missed by local officials in Wuhan -because the city's medical facilities were overwhelmed.

Health Minister Greg Hunt said the federal government had confidence in Australia's coronavirus numbers.

"Australia's own figures have been identified by the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine as the most accurate of 83 countries around the world," he said.

China has been criticised for being slow to publicly -announce it had detected clusters of pneumonia cases with no known source in December 2019, preventing health officials from sounding the alarm at the time.

Labor's health spokesman Chris Bowen said the Opposition backed an independent review and as Australia's top diplomat Ms Payne must work to make it a "reality".

How China let down the world SLOW TO CONFIRM VIRUS ■ Chinese authorities only announced cases of pneumonia of an unknown cause on December 31, but the first cluster of patients had been identified on December 21.

■ On January 23, Wuhan was cut off by Chinese authorities, but at least 100,000 people had already left the city via trains.

HEALTH STAFF GAGGED ■ Central Hospital of Wuhan banned staff from discussing the disease. ■ Chinese doctor Dr Li Wenliang allegedly forced to retract his warning. He died from COVID-19.

REPORTERS DENIED ACCESS ■ Hong Kong reporters detained trying to film Wuhan hospital. HOARDED MEDICAL SUPPLIES ■ Chinese companies ordered to source PPE and other medical supplies in early January.

WET MARKETS CONTINUE ■ In February, China said it was reviewing its trade and consumption of wildlife, but later allowed wet markets to reopen.

INFECTION AND DEATH RATES LACK TRANSPARENCY ■ China not counting asymptomatic cases or overseas arrivals. ■ China increased its Wuhan death rate by 50 per cent in one day. COVID-19 EQUIPMENT FAULTY■ Australian Border Force seized 800,000 PPE products imported privately from China that weren't up to standard.