MEET the Wolf Warriors: Aggressive, blustering, and given to the occasional tantrum, they are the front-line soldiers in China's ever--louder propaganda war.

These are the diplomats, spokesmen and advocates tasked by Beijing with shifting blame for the regime's failure to stop COVID-19 from escaping into the world - and at the same time -convincing us, against mounting evidence to the contrary, that the Chinese Communist Party's intentions are peaceful.

Taking their name from a popular nationalist Chinese film franchise about a Rambo-like security contractor who takes on American mercenaries, the Wolf Warriors compete to outdo one -another with aggressive, bullying rhetoric - as well as a thin-skinned hypersensitivity that makes them the ultimate cry-bullies.

In other words, when it comes to the subtle art of using words to win friends and influence people, these "diplomats" are more -Eric Cartman than Henry -Kissinger.

But now with trade tensions at an all time high over demands for a coronavirus -inquiry, Beijing's wolf warriors in Australia are at the forefront of the communist regime's crumbling attempts to use "soft diplomacy" to convince the world that its -intentions are peaceful - even as their actions become ever more threatening.

And they've been firing up for some time, with diplomats even turning into Twitter trolls - ironic given that the social media platform is banned in China.

Take the case of Zhao -Lijian, who started out as a minor diplomat and won a coveted spot as spokesman for Beijing's foreign ministry.

Zhao first came to prominence in the United States last year when he responded on the mass internment and worse of China's Muslim Uig-hur population with a series of snarky tweets about racial discrimination in the US.

With coronavirus raging, Zhao made headlines again for pushing a conspiracy -theory that COVID-19 came from the US and was spread by American soldiers in Wuhan for an athletics competition last year, tweeting: "When did patient zero begin in US? How many people are infected? What are the names of the hospitals? It might be US Army who brought the epidemic to Wuhan. Be -transparent! Make public your data! US owe us an -explanation!" Needless to say, there's -little chance that Zhao was pressing that theory without approval from on high, suggesting that for China's foreign service the competition is on to see who can be the most outrageous and offensive in defence of the homeland.

And when it comes to consistency, never mind that Zhao's call suggests China is happy with anybody being -investigated over the coronavirus … except China.

Nor is it just big targets like the US who are the subject of the wolf pack's ire.

China's embassy in Sri Lanka was reportedly so bothered by a tweet by a local with just 30 followers calling the Chinese government "low class" that it fired back "Total death in #China #pandemic is 3344 till today, much -smaller than your western 'high class' governments".

In Australia, the bickering has consequences, with our exports of barley, beef, wine and other products being held up by China's war of words.

The big problem for Beijing now is that having annoyed so many other nations with their behaviour, they may soon find themselves on the end of boycotts of their own.

THE CHINA CHEERLEADERS These Australians have acted in support of China but are not necessarily wolf warriors or directly CCP-affiliated ANDREW "TWIGGY" FORREST: The billionaire mining magnate, whose Fortescue Metals Group is a major supplier of iron ore to China, has been quick to give Beijing the benefit of the doubt. Having organised for China's Victorian Consul- General to ambush a media opportunity with Health Minister Greg Hunt, Forrest has said: "I don't know if this virus started in China or somewhere else and frankly I don't care." KERRY STOKES: The Western Australian media mogul has also been keen for Australia to ratchet down its criticism of China, recently advising Scott Morrison to not "poke our biggest provider of income in the eye" with a coronavirus inquiry. Perth locals have noted the pro-China tilt in his flagship paper The West Australian, which last year ran two editorials in as many months from Beijing's local Consul-General, Dong Zhihua.

KEVIN RUDD: The former PM, apparently having gotten over being "ratf...ed" by Chinese counterparts at the 2009 climate talks, has been a big critic of Mr Morrison's efforts to build support for a coronavirus inquiry, having said earlier this month: "Australian exports find themselves unnecessarily exposed at this time through the Morrison Government not having properly diplomatically prepared this." TIM PALLAS: The Treasurer of Victoria, the only state to sign up to China's contentious Belt and Road Initiative, this week complained that China's tariffs on Australian barley were due to the way "the federal government have conducted themselves".

SHAOQUETT MOSELMANE: The state Labor MP was forced out of his role as assistant president of the NSW Legislative Council for his repeated praise of the Chinese communist regime.

MARK BUTTIGIEG: Another state Labor MP, Buttigieg tweeted earlier this month that "China is our future" and that "Australia can ill afford to maintain its historical and biased preference for China".

THE WOLF WARRIORS VICTORIAN CONSUL-GENERAL LONG ZHOU: Zhou shot to prominence when he gatecrashed a press conference by federal Health Minister Greg Hunt last month. Zhou reportedly helped to develop China's cyberspace "co-operation policy" - even as the Chinese Communist Party was engaged in hacking Western businesses and government departments.

ACADEMIC CHEN HONG: The director of the Australian Studies Centre at Shanghai's East China Normal University, Chen Hong is a leading voice trotted out by Beijing to give China's perspective, often with quotes that are as flowery as they are threatening. "Canberra is exercising despicable opportunism and is deluded in thinking it will result in geopolitical gains," Chen said recently, accusing Australian media of "spreading preposterous lies" and "sensational tales".

GLOBAL TIMES EDITOR HU XIJIN: Based in China, the boss of one of the communist regime's key mouthpieces recently threatened Australia, posting on Chinese social media platform Weibo that we are "like chewing gum stuck on the sole of China's shoes … sometimes you have to find a stone to rub it off".

CHINESE AMBASSADOR CHENG JINGYE: The leader of the Australian wolf pack, Jingye made headlines around the world when he broke longstanding diplomatic rules by leaking details of a conversation with the head of our Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. Jingye has also headed efforts to threaten Australian farmers, winemakers and universities, telling a local newspaper last month that an inquiry into coronavirus's origins would be "dangerous", adding: "It is up to the people to decide. Maybe the ordinary people will say, 'Why should we drink Australian wine? Eat Australian beef?' "

SYDNEY CONSUL-GENERAL GU XIAOJE: The local wolf warrior's "man of letters", Xiaoje is s best known for penning long responses to this newspaper and others claiming that a free press reporting on the origins of the coronavirus violates something called "the moral bottom line". In February he reportedly pushed state ministers and even university vice-chancellors to complain to Canberra about the effects of a ban on flights from China on our "international reputation". The ban has been credited with making our rate of infection one of the world's lowest.

CHINESE AMBASSADOR CHENG JINGYE: The leader of the Australian wolf pack, Jingye made headlines around the world when he broke longstanding diplomatic rules by leaking details of a conversation with the head of our Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. Jingye has also headed efforts to threaten Australian farmers, winemakers and universities, telling a local newspaper last month that an inquiry into coronavirus's origins would be "dangerous", adding: "It is up to the people to decide. Maybe the ordinary people will say, 'Why should we drink Australian wine? Eat Australian beef?' "