Time to act on busted NRL bunker Once again the NRL bunker is broken and has caused another team to lose a match (Gould diggers, 27/7).

The fact that they don't seem to be able to get the "hard" decisions right is of concern to clubs, and more importantly fans, despite having a plethora of video and technical equipment and of course their supposed expertise.

NRL head of football Graham Annesley must be sick of making lame excuses for the poor performance of the bunker and perhaps appointing Phil Gould as a Mr Fix-it may prove a remedy.

However, perhaps Annesley should pass the bunker role to Fox Sport or Channel 9 commentators. They invariably get it right, certainly more times than the bunker does, and the savings would easily pay the way for Mr Gould.

Peter Cattlin, Freshwater "" " Having watched five NRL games last weekend, I am even more convinced that bunkers should only be on golf courses and even there they should be avoided!

Paul Wood, Nambucca Heads

Criminals haven't earned special COVID rights For the two women complaining about not being able to have face- to-face visits with their imprisoned husband and boyfriend and want the government to cut them some slack, ask yourselves did your partners cut the victims of their criminal behaviour any slack (WAGS say no contact rule is just criminal, 27/7).

No they didn't, so why should they be treated any different to how they acted. They are criminals and are where they belong.

No visitors should be allowed in prisons while this pandemic is going on. Be thankful you get to see them on video chat.

Some victims of crime never get to see their loved ones because that right was taken away from them by criminal acts.

So think yourselves fortunate you get to talk to your partners as others may not be so lucky due to no fault of their own.

Narelle, Sydney

This cop is certainly tops My "yea for the day" goes to Senior Sergeant Greg Donaldson (Caring cop's stand on seats, 27/7).

Going beyond the 'call of duty' in his initiative to install cars seats instead of issuing fines to struggling families is to be commended.

As an ex-copper's' wife (and grandmother), I would be happy to contribute $350 towards a family in need, to keep a child safe (and save a life).

Thank you Greg, for keeping the next generation safe through your dedicated work.

The saying "cops are tops", certainly rings true here.

Gloria Velleley, Belrose

Beware rising bully China has become the world's number one bully as it continues to do whatever it likes and threatens anyone who questions what they are doing (China's export threat, 27/7).

You only have to look at the countries around the world that have naively accepted money from them, not realising the influence the Chinese government now has over them.

You only have to look at the ports they have built in these countries. This, along with their occupation of islands in the South China Sea is part of their long-term plan to be a world superpower.

You only have to look at the military expansion by China. You don't continue expanding this capacity unless you have some plan to it.

As the rest of the world continues to deal with the pandemic, economies being brought to their knees, protest marches and surviving day to day, China seems to be doing whatever it likes. The trouble is, when we all wake up it will be too late.

Joe Kovac, Prestons

Scrapped tax a good start The NSW government is to be applauded for temporarily scrapping stamp duty for first-home buyers purchasing newly built properties up to $800,000. This is designed to spur virus recovery.

The subject of housing stamp duty has been under the spotlight ever since the introduction of the GST in 1999.

Economists and think tanks have universally chorused that the tax with its GST implications should be abolished and or replaced.

The change while welcome is temporary, narrowly focused and price-capped. NSW is in a deep hole with the COVID-19 virus pandemic. We need a bigger shovel. Peter Penglis, Kambah

Death march danger The stupidity of Black Lives Matter protest organisers knows no bounds (Protest and face jail time, 27/7).

Any protest would now be illegal and against dire warnings from the court, police and the NSW government about the great danger of spreading a killer virus.

But, apparently, they will still march. Such a move would defeat its purpose of saving lives.

With COVID-19 seemingly rampant throughout Sydney, they are putting everyone's lives in jeopardy - no matter whether the colour of your skin is black, brown or white - with their reckless attitude.

It would seem that any march would be more for pure spite and against all the best medical experts' advice.

Robert Livingstone, Alexandria

Free to act responsibly People value their freedom and many have fought and died to protect it (Protest and face jail time, 27/7).

They would be horrified that freedom could include the right to be stupid and endanger others.

You can hold whatever stupid belief you want but exercising your freedom should never put people's freedom and lives at risk.

Put your masks on, keep your mouths shut and hope that real science comes up with a solution.

Dennis Fitzgerald, Box Hill, Vic

Anarchy awaits defunding To those who would have their politicians defund the police (No to defunding police - Editorial, 27/7) I ask these questions.

Which would you rather see: a motorist speeding past your kids' school at 3pm cop a fine, or devil-may-care chaos?

A petty thief arrested, or allowed to escape?

A child molester getting his just deserts or ignored?

Law and order or anarchy?

Douglas Mackenzie, Deakin, ACT

Name game shame The owners of Coon cheese should enlighten themselves with the origins of the names of two of the state's central west townships in Coonamble and Coonabarabran (Aussie icon dumps brand name after BLM backlash, 25/7).

Both names are derived from Aboriginal languages. Anyone offended? The ignorance and stupidity of corporations making decisions like this is breathtaking.

Scott, Manly

Hanging out for Tim time If ever reincarnation could happen, please let me come back with the looks of George Clooney and the wealth of Bill Gates.

No, just joking, but please let me come back with the essay skills, penmanship and wit of Tim Blair (Get creative, whiners, 27/7).

I think all Telegraph columnists are exceptional, but how I look forward to Mondays so much to read another article written by Tim.

Alan Darley, Cronulla

Briefly ...

Why suspend stamp duty for only one year (A stamp of approval, 27/7)? This loathed tax should be scrapped permanently.

David Ingram, Randwick "" " One more great has left us, but don't worry Olivia, you have not gone with the wind. We will never forget you (Hollywood legend Olivia de Havilland dies, Online 27/7).

Peter Barr, Manly "" " Finally a good news story. Greg Donaldson is inspirational and to be admired (Caring cop's stand on seats, 27/7). Top cop, top guy.

Kathe Fraser, Bellevue Hill

HAVE YOUR SAYMAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001