SOCIAL distancing and masks weren't on th-e menu at one of Sydney's hippest markets as it reopened for the first time in months.

Despite Australian Medical Association warnings about young people and hospitality businesses' casual attitude to social distancing, observers say shoppers at Carriageworks Farmers Market in Redfern were way too close for comfort.

The market draws high-end fresh food and beverage producers from all over Greater Sydney, but, until yesterday, had been closed since late March.

"The stalls were still pretty close together and there were a lot of people hanging around; it's hardly the sort of get-in-and-out style shopping experience that you see at the supermarkets," one man, who did not want to be named, said.

"There were some stallholders without masks." A female masked shopper said: "I'd say about half the people are wearing masks and the social distancing seemed OK." On its website Carriageworks said it was limiting numbers to 350 people as well as banning both BYO coffee cups and tastings.

On Saturday the state recorded its lowest COVID-19 statistics in more than two weeks, with nine infections in the 24 hours to 8pm on Friday.

It's the first time NSW's cases have dipped below double figures since July 24, when seven cases were -recorded.

One of the new cases is a student of Tangara School for Girls in Cherrybrook in Sydney's northwest.

The school has been closed for cleaning and contact tracing is continuing, with the source of infection under investigation.

The origin of that and two other infections remain a mystery to NSW Health contact tracers.

Australian Medical Association NSW president Dr Danielle McMullen said the numbers were nothing to get excited about.

"I am more concerned now than I have been at any other time during this pandemic because we do have cases of community transmission and we don't know where all of them are coming from," she said.

"We also know that people are tired of lockdowns now and there are both businesses and individuals that are not necessarily taking it as seriously as they should.

"It is hard for businesses, but they really need to be doing it at the moment - particularly hospitality." Dr McMullen said many young people's disregard for social distancing was of particular concern and that "I don't know how we get the messages out to younger people if they are not engaging with traditional media".