THERE are plans for New Zealand to take on Tonga in an end-of-year series to replicate a State of Origin-type contest between the international rivals.

League taskforce Project Apollo will today consider a proposal that would pit the two countries against each other in a three-game series to run at the same time as Origin in November. The winner of the series could potentially play Australia to round out the year.

The Kiwis coach Michael Maguire supports the idea. "I think it would be huge," he said. "I've been trying to push it in the background.

"There is a lot of talk about Origin, but the international game is a massive opportunity for the (Pacific) islanders in our game. It gives an opportunity for these guys and brings them together before the Rugby League World Cup (England, 2021).

"The concept would be excellent." Australia would almost certainly play host to the matches - depending on the travel restrictions.

The game is exploring ways to have an international window while Origin is played after the NRL grand final on October 25. That could include matches for England, Samoa and Fiji.

Costs and travel restrictions will be critical elements to these concepts progressing and also whether the broadcast partners have an appetite to show representative football.

Australia was due to tour England at the end of the year but that is almost certainly going to be scrapped because of COVID-19.

Tonga shone last year - beating Australia and Great Britain. They lost 34-14 to New Zealand last year in their only match since beating the Kiwis in the 2017 World Cup.

""" RETIRED Wests Tigers hooker Robbie Farah will conduct an online exercise session tomorrow to raise money for Beyond Blue.

Partnering with Vision Lane Cove, Farah hopes to raise $10,000 for the charity. "We know there is a direct link between physical and mental health, and we also know that during this time of lockdown people have found being confined incredibly challenging," Farah said.The session will start at 7am. Visit facebook.com/VisionPTLaneCove.