KFC SuperCoach returns next Thursday and in case you've been living under a rock, we get FIVE trades for the upcoming round to allow for corona shenanigans.

Needless to say, the "T" button has copped a hammering for Sangster's Paradise. These are my five changes - subject to serious changes and DCE-style backflips. 1 David Fifita ($501,900) to " David Klemmer ($617,400), via Liam Knight The Broncos rolled the dice early in the COVID-19 break and sent Fifita for knee surgery. The gamble didn't pay off with the NRL to return much sooner than expected, meaning Fifita "will probably miss a few weeks", according to coach Anthony Seibold. Owned by over 50 per cent of KFC SuperCoaches, Fifita is the most sold player for Round 3. With the total trades staying at 37 despite reduced rounds, there is simply no point in stashing him.

With Jason Taumalolo a Sangster's Paradise stalwart, Klemmer is the obvious replacement after pumping out 69 and 72 in the opening weeks mostly in pure base, although he has also developed an offload. With Origin on after the season proper the value of Origin players is at an all-time high.

2 Nathan Cleary ($631,500) to"Connor Watson ($506,700) Cleary's TikTok drama has me TickedOff. The star Panther was my star POD for the season start and delivered big time by scoring second most points of anyone in the opening fortnight. However, Cleary is suspended for the next two rounds. Usually he'd be a definite hold, but the newly-introduced post-COVID rules mean 2020 has become a trade-a-holic's dream and Cleary must go (KFC SuperCoach Gods have retained 37 trades despite the five-round reduction and there is no Origin or byes to deal with).

What's more, there is a serious replacement on offer in Watson, who looms as a POD of the year at just two per cent ownership. The Newcastle utility is off the bench as he has the hooker spot to himself after the season-ending injury to Jayden Brailey (ACL). Watson played seven matches at No.9 ast year for scores of 91, 70, 55, 75, 82, 117 and 24 for an average of 73.5PPG. That's keeper territory, yet he's priced at a huge discount after averaging just 46 minutes last season.

3Jack Williams ($397,200) to"Eliesa Katoa ($171,900) Williams came into the season with plenty of hype after fighting off a number of contenders to claim Paul Gallen's No.13 jersey. The prediction of more game time was spot on with Williams averaging 54 minutes - up from 37 last year. But the time warp has come at the expense of work rate, with his PPM dropping from a beastly 1.14 to 0.64.

He is replaced by Warriors young gun Katoa - the most popular cheapie for the restart round. The injuries keep coming at the Warriors and the rookie is the big beneficiary. With Josh Curran, Agnatius Paasi and Jazz Tevaga out over the first two rounds, Katoa stunned by averaging 59 minutes and was arguably the Warriors' best forward.

However, his KFC SuperCoach stocks dipped when Paasi, Tevaga and Curran all made the plane over to Oz, seemingly relegating Katoa to a bench spot. Or so we thought. Barely a week into training and Tevaga and Leeson Ahn Mau both went down long term, all but assuring Katoa big minutes.

4 Kallum Watkins ($271,800) to"Isaah Yeo ($404,800) A forced change. England and Titans centre Kallum Watkins was set for a few handy price rises but is now a must-sell after quitting the NRL and heading back to the UK to support his father, who contracted coronavirus.

Playing 80 minutes at backrow but available at CTW, Yeo shows signs of being a John Bateman, Tohu Harris, Simon Mannering-style keeper, pumping out enormous base stats in a position known for inconsistency. He is the third most purchased player for Round 3 and for good reason.

5 Braidon Burns ($454,400) to Kotoni Staggs ($447,700) At the start of the season I had a 50-50 call between Burns and Staggs. Of course I opted for Burns, who currently sits 255 of 282 KFC SuperCoach players, while Staggs has the most points of any player. The four tries and three linebreaks have certainly helped, but more impressive for KFC SuperCoach is the nine tackle busts. Staggs is currently the most popular buy for Round 3, attracting double the interest of the next player Koroisau.