Arthur scoffs at 'asterisk' title claims and warns ...

BRAD Arthur has shot down suggestions this year's NRL champions will have an asterisk beside their name in the record books.

Instead, Arthur reckons this season will be a "real ironman test" in which teams will play 18 straight rounds without a bye or State of Origin disrupting the ultimate survival of the fittest.

In a huge boost for the Eels, Arthur also said hooker Reed Mahoney would be fit to return from his broken foot in the comeback game against Brisbane.

However, Arthur is reluctant to move Ryan Matterson from an edge to cover the suspension of lock Nathan Brown.

There has been huge debate about the controversial changes that have been implemented because of COVID-19, ranging from the shortened regular season to playing Origin at the end of the year, as well the fact there will now be one referee and a six-again interpretation.

While some believe the changes devalue the competition, Arthur argued it could make it even tougher.

"It is a real ironman test for me because you are going to have to play 18 weeks straight," Arthur said.

"That is unseen in our competition, and then you go into finals. You usually have a couple of byes and rep rounds (to break up the season).

"I know other guys have to play rep footy but they usually get looked after a bit by their clubs.

"So management of your players is going to be really important. Having everyone in your squad ready is probably another important factor.

"But if you ask the players, there is no way in the world that any of them would (say the competition has been -devalued).

"They all work so hard. It is hard enough to win one game of NRL, let alone a whole competition.

"You ask the players and you ask the team at the end of the year that does end up winning it if it doesn't mean anything to them." Parramatta showed in the first two rounds before the shutdown that they are going to be up with the competition heavyweights but the trick now is going to be adapting to the changes.

Arthur has an idea about how his team will respond but can't be certain until the changes are tested under match-day pressure.

The six-again interpretation will likely suit eyes-up players like Clint Gutherson and Mitchell Moses, who really have a knack of taking advantage of tired defenders.

But Arthur said every team would have players capable of making the most of the changes.

He said the Eels planned to trial their techniques at a training run tomorrow but because of the "bubble" restrictions in place around all NRL teams (where no outsiders are allowed in), they couldn't get a qualified referee to take charge of the session.

Mahoney will be ready to play the Broncos but Arthur did not reveal who would take Brown's place at lock. He did say Matterson was an unlikely option because Arthur wants him to stay on Moses' edge, meaning the likes of Kane Evans, Peni Terepo, Marata Niukore and Oregon Kaufusi are all fighting for the starting spot.