THERE'S SO MUCH INFORMATION FLOATING AROUND, CLAIMING TO BE THE LATEST FACTS ON CORONAVIRUS - AND MOST OF IT IS SIMPLY A LOAD OF GARBAGE. DAVID MEDDOWS LOOKS AT THE MOST COMMON MYTHS AND WHY THEY ARE SIMPLY NOT TRUE.

Myth: Sitting in the sun will cure coronavirus if you have it or prevent you from getting it.

Reality: The World Health Organisation (WHO) says exposure to the sun has no impact on coronavirus infection and countries with hot climates are reporting cases.

Myth: Holding your breath for 10 seconds without discomfort means you don't have coronavirus.

Reality: While shortness of breath and a dry, hoarse cough are symptoms of COVID-19, they aren't always present early. Authorities have debunked this myth and have even said it can be dangerous.

Myth: COVID-19 only affects older people / is only serious in those above 70 / only kills older people.

Reality: Babies as young as a few weeks old have tested positive, and in NSW the largest age group of confirmed cases is 20-29. Cases are also being reported every day of younger victims dying from the virus.

Myth: Coronavirus can be caught through drinking tap water.

Reality: There is no evidence to suggest that the virus can be transmitted through our water supply. All the major water corporations, including Sydney Water, have stated our drinking water is safe to use and there is no need to buy bottled water.

Myth: The virus started from someone eating bat soup.

Reality: It is too early for scientists to pinpoint exactly where COVID-19 originated. Researchers have found similarities to coronaviruses found in bats but also in pangolins. In either case, the virus is highly unlikely to jump directly to humans but instead more likely to have passed through an intermediary host such as civets or ferrets.

Myth: Spraying yourself with chlorine or alcohol will kill the coronavirus. Reality: Not only has the WHO shot this myth down, it has warned that it can be dangerous to areas such as your eyes, nose and mouth. It also suggested it wouldn't be too good for your clothes either.

Myth: COVID-19 is just like flu.

Reality: This new coronavirus and influenza do share many common symptoms - coughing, fever and joint pain are just a few - but scientists warn this virus is much more contagious than the flu and, while research is still ongoing, the belief is it has a much higher mortality rate than the flu.

Myth: Pets, especially cats and dogs, are spreading the virus to their owners. Reality: The WHO says there is no evidence that your pets can spread the disease.

Myth: The virus was created in a Chinese lab and is a form of genetic warfare aimed at making China the ruler of the world.

Reality: It is natural in origin. A team of researchers including Kristian Andersen, an associate professor of immunology and microbiology at Scripps Research, Robert Garry of Tulane University, Edward Holmes of the University of Sydney, Andrew Rambaut of University of Edinburgh and W. Ian Lipkin of Columbia University recently published those findings in the journal Nature Medicine.

Myth: Drinking water every 15 minutes will flush out the virus. Reality: An email that was doing the rounds in the early stages of this pandemic suggested drinking water regularly would flush the virus down your throat to be killed by your stomach acids. This has been debunked by leading health authorities, who point out there are often millions of virus particles being ingested and they can enter through your eyes and nose too.

Myth: Once you have coronavirus you have it for life.

Reality: Like other viruses, you fully recover from COVID-19. Some patients will become extremely ill and others will tragically die but the vast majority of people will make a full recovery.

Myth: Wearing a mask will prevent you from getting coronavirus. Reality: NSW Health does not recommend a face mask for the general population, saying they should be used by those who have the virus or are showing symptoms. There is mixed advice on this, with some countries such as South Korea, where the spread was slow and the death rate low, having most of its citizens wearing masks in public. Many experts agree that cheap or makeshift masks still have a high potential of letting the virus in.

Myth: Hand dryers can kill COVID-19.

Reality: There is no evidence that would suggest this is the case, with NSW Health saying hand dryers could potentially help spread the disease if someone who hasn't adequately washed their hands is using one.

Myth: Drinking alcohol protects you against the virus.

Reality: Unfortunately not.

Myth: Mosquitos can carry and transmit the coronavirus.

Reality: COVID-19 is respiratory virus that is transmitted primarily through droplets from the nose or mouth and the WHO says there has been no evidence to date that mosquitoes, who transmit disease such as malaria through blood, can pass on this virus.

Myth: The virus started from someone eating bat soup.Reality: It is too early for scientists to pinpoint exactly where COVID-19 originated. Researchers have found similarities to coronaviruses found in bats but also in pangolins. In either case, the virus is highly unlikely to jump directly to humans but instead more likely to have passed through an intermediary host such as civets or ferrets.