1. Mistakes will be made when -people are under pressure, but -allowing 48 Jetstar passengers to leave Sydney airport after arriving from Melbourne without screening is -unforgivable. Now three of the 48 passengers who have been contacted are refusing to be tested. What sort of -insanity are we dealing with here?

2. The NSW Government should have closed the borders with Victoria last Friday, not this week. It was troubling to watch the Premier Gladys Berejiklian deeply concerned at a media conference on Wednesday. She holds grave fears NSW might pay a penalty for Victoria's stupidity, and rightly so.

3. There are still those in Australia who claim the virus is nothing more than a bad dose of the flu. Annually 350,000 to 600,000 people die due to the flu across the world. About one billion people globally contract the flu, despite there being a vaccine. In six months we've had over 12 million COVID-19 cases and more than 550,000 deaths and there's no vaccine. If one billion people get the virus we'll have tens of millions of deaths. That's a bit more serious than a dose of the flu.

4. The NSW government has backflipped on moving the Powerhouse Museum to Parramatta. It's now decided to keep one at Ultimo and build a new one at Parramatta. That's good, except the chosen site at Parramatta will see two magnificent heritage-listed buildings torn down. Premier, please find another site in the west.

5. How the DPP withdrew the case against returned Minister Don Harwin over his breach of the lockdown has many baffled, including Police Commissioner Mick -Fuller, who said he stood by his decision to confirm the infringement -notice. Equally perplexed are some senior ministers in the government who couldn't quite believe the -Premier's haste to reinstate the hapless Harwin.

6. I can't understand the comments of District Court Judge Robyn Tupman who, in sentencing a man to jail for sexual assault, said he wasn't a paedophile because he thought his 12-year-old victim was older. Well, -unfortunately in reality Fouad "Fred" Hasna is a paedophile given the victim of his vile sexual assault was a 12-year-old boy.

7. Federal Finance Minister Math-ias Cormann will be sadly missed when he retires in December. He's been an outstanding member of the government and we owe him a great debt of gratitude for tapping Malcolm Turnbull on shoulder and telling him "it's time".

8. Addin Fonua Blake and Manly need to stop making excuses. Their skipper Daly Cherry-Evans -entered the debate late in the week when he should have pulled his head in. Addin needs to take ownership of what he said both on the field and off the field with no excuses, cop his -punishment and move on.

9. The transcripts of text messages sent by jockey Adam Hyeronimus appear to be quite damning. Racing NSW stewards are considering whether or not they should take -drastic action over his alleged betting activities. 10. It's been 40 years since State of Origin started and I've been fortunate enough to have called 80 of those matches. The stand-out is still the Mark Coyne try at the Sydney Football Stadium in 1994.