SOMEWHERE hidden away in Port Kembla is Hill 60.

An old World War II military stronghold which rises some 70m above sea level in a patchwork of ageing gun batteries, tunnels and one unthinkably steep bitumen road.

Years ago, it was the Illawarra Steelers' proving ground.

With late, great coach Graham Murray - who spent five years leading the club in the 90s - particularly fond of sending his scarlet and white troops up said hill every pre-season.

Yet today?

It belongs to Alex Volkanovski.

The Australian UFC champion who has adapted his own program from that forged by the likes of Steelers greats Rod Wishart, Paul McGregor, John Simon and Neil Piccinelli.

"And now that I'm likely headed for some private island," Volkanovski said this week, "there's going to be a lot more climbing".

While most of world sport remains in lockdown, Australia's UFC featherweight champ is quietly running up hills in preparation for a title defence he knows nothing about.

Only that it's coming.

Especially given this past week, UFC president Dana White has announced UFC 249 for May 10 (AEST), three events for that week, and also suggested his hyped 'Fight Island' project will be operational for international athletes by June.

Enter Volkanovski.

After claiming the UFC strap from Hawaiian Max Holloway in December, this 31-year-old Wollongong fighter was firming for a title rematch at UFC 250 in Perth, this June.

However with the COVID-19 outbreak cancelling that card, Volkanovski is now gunning to lead off on Fight Island, complete with Octagon on the beach.

Which is why, with NSW in lockdown, and his Freestyle Fighting Gym shuttered, Volkanovski has started on the most unique training camp of his fight career.

Each morning, the UFC champ connects via zoom with his strength and conditioning coach Chrisy Jaffrey, who doubles as an exercise physiologist at the BaiMed Performance Centre.

Located just outside Wollongong, BaiMed's staff have not only worked with the NSW Origin side, but also NRL premiership teams from St George Illawarra and Cronulla.

Elsewhere, Matildas striker Caitlin Foord also employs the specialist training team, as did US basketball prodigy LaMelo Ball when Down Under with the Illawarra Hawks.

So with Jaffrey providing instruction, Volkanovski does weights in his lounge room, conditioning in the backyard and, increasingly, arduous solo sessions up Hill 60.

"We use the hills around Port Kembla to work on aerobic power," Jaffrey explained. "It's actually based off the old Steelers program.

"Near the top of Hill 60, it also becomes about pushing the body and mind to its limits. Really driving the heart rate up to reach maximum and develop aerobic power." Asked about the hill climbs, Volkanovski added: "I have no idea how I explain the road's steepness - other than to say I don't think houses are allowed be built anywhere up it.

"But this is what I need to do.

"Because if there is one guy can get us fighting on a beach, it's Dana White. So I think you'll see me fighting on an island soon."

IN ISOLATION WITH ... Alexander VolkanovskiWatch the video @dailytelegraph.com.au