Victorian Premier Dan Andrews has been using his state's inquiry into Victoria's disastrous coronavirus failures as a shield to avoid commentary on the issue.

Every time Andrews has faced press conference questions about his government's obvious missteps, he pretends that the inquiry prevents his ability to respond.

It doesn't. As The Daily Telegraph has pointed out, the inquiry does not have trial status. There is no jury to be influenced by anything Andrews says.

The premier was always free to comment - or, more appropriately, to apologise for his government's incompetence.

Nowhere was that incompetence more damaging than in the decision to employ private security firms instead of police to guard quarantine hotels.

Well, the time is almost up for Andrews. The inquiry began yesterday, and the opening -remarks of Tony Neal QC, the counsel assisting, went directly to the heart of the matter.

"Information already available to the inquiry suggests the possibility of a link between many of the cases of coronavirus identified in the Victorian community in the past few weeks and persons who were quarantined under the hotel quarantine program," Neal said.

Then came this follow-up: "Comments made by the chief health officer to the media have suggested that it may even be that every case of COVID-19 in Victoria in recent weeks could be sourced to the hotel quarantine program." Every. Single. Case. No wonder Andrews has been so keen to avoid any answers. Unlike the Victorian and Australian public, who have been denied access to the medical data on how the coronavirus spread from its quarantine origins, Neal and the inquiry will have all of that evidence.

What the inquiry does not have is much time. The inquiry is due to report by September 25.

Still, that may be time enough to establish the key facts in Victoria's quarantine debacle - and who was responsible.

Andrews will likely continue stonewalling. Yet all that will do is build anger as the inquiry's due date draws near.

Despite its brevity, we would ask that the inquiry also investigate how Victoria's coronavirus incompetence influenced increased infection rates in NSW. NSW has an enormous stake in this inquiry, too.