FOOTBALLERS are notoriously bad at protecting their health, a claim proven each summer when they book up enough work to keep surgeons in expensive European cars for a good 12 months, and often more.

Post-game dressing rooms often look like a MASH unit.

The reason is as simple as players often feel a loyalty to teammates that measures somewhere above even their own welfare.

Given that, Tommy Trbojevic should be eliminated from -Origin consideration for the good of himself.

It is not enough to give Trbojevic the choice, as NSW coach Brad Fittler and offsider Greg Alexander favour, which sounds fair and democratic but puts Trbojevic in a compromised position.

There is a loyalty in Trbojevic that is uncommon. He will feel compelled to do the right thing by Fittler and Alexander and play the game, even if it comes at his own expense.

On Saturday he made his long-awaited return to the field after missing 13 weeks with a hamstring injury and he lasted all of 62 minutes before he was out again, this time nursing a shoulder injury.

It got worse, though.

The next day Fittler put a microphone in front of him and asked if he was right to play for NSW in the State of Origin series beginning -November 4.

It all seemed good humoured on the surface.

"If the coach picks me," -Trbojevic said.

Fittler replied: "If you stop sooking you're the first man in the team." It was pure theatre. An in-joke, given everyone knows Fittler also doubles as the NSW coach, that everyone was allowed to share.

The Sea Eagles were unhappy with the interview and believe Trbojevic felt compelled to do it - and also declare his availability - because while Fittler was there as the interviewer it was clear to Trbojevic that he was the NSW coach.

Trbojevic is not ready for Origin this season. To pick him would be a disservice to him and to the Sea Eagles, who pay his wage. He would feel compelled to play whether he was physically ready or not.

Trbojevic began the season strongly and played until round six when his hamstring went ping and he could not return until round 19.

Most of the 13-week break away from rugby league was spent on light duties, repairing what might not only be the longest hamstring in the game, but the most talked about.

Trbojevic was underdone for Manly on Saturday and it would take a supreme dose of optimism to believe he would be ready to play for the Blues in another six weeks.

It has almost been missed that Trbojevic's injury on Saturday falls into the pattern of a long and damaging season. One of the hallmarks of this year is the staggering injury rate which has made it as much a test of survival as talent.

At one point almost a quarter of registered players in the NRL this season were sidelined with injury.

Injuries have decimated Manly's season. The Sea Eagles were widely tipped to make the playoffs before the season and were seventh when Trbojevic went down in round six.

Add five-eighth Dylan Walker to the injured list and hooker Manase Fainu, who did not even make the season start, and the Sea Eagles have battled most of the season without three-quarters of their -starting spine.

Coaches have no doubt why the injury toll has been so significant. Teams spent all summer preparing for the season and then managed to get off only two games before the competition was suspended due to COVID-19. When the announcement came that the season would be resumed after a nine-week break, teams were given only a few weeks at training before play resumed, a preparation most coaches complained was too brief.

But the league was in a hurry to restart the season.

Players were rushed back with minimal contact in training. This lack of proper preparation, coaches believe, was the greatest contributor to the injury toll. Players were simply underprepared for the physicality of the game.

As Trbojevic was on Saturday, and will be in six weeks time when Origin is picked. The job, if he is picked, will be to play at Origin intensity after one game in 19 weeks. Trbojevic will answer the call because that is the kind of man he is. But it is a choice he should not have to make.