AT the same ground where they were the first victims of a COVID-19 lockout, the Australian men's team will 270 days later become the first sporting side in NSW to return to playing in front of a full house.

Tuesday's final Twenty20 international will now be played at a 100 per cent capacity SCG, and there is a sense of symmetry about cricket becoming the first beneficiary of the State Government's announcement that fans are finally allowed back in force.

The decision is also great news for undefeated Sydney boxer Tim Tszyu, whose fight against New Zealander Bowyn Morgan on December 16 will now be staged before 30,000 fans at Bankwest Stadium.

Cricket Australia had been operating on a 50 per cent capacity for Sydney, but in the coming days it will release a flood of extra tickets to make the Indian T20 on December 8 one of the biggest sporting spectacles of the year.

On the back of the Queensland Government opening up for a capacity State of Origin crowd, NSW has now joined the party in time for January's marquee Sydney Test to be sold as the full-capacity showpiece organisers feared might not be possible.

The Australian players wouldn't have forgotten the eerie experience of walking out onto the SCG on March 13 to a completely empty stadium for an ODI against New Zealand. But on Tuesday, that day zero of the pandemic's crippling impact on sport in Australia will feel like a distant memory when upwards of 40,000 are invited back to the SCG.

"The Aussie men's team were the first in the country to play to a locked out stadium when the pandemic struck in March," CA executive -Anthony Everard said. "Now, nine months later and at the very same venue, we will be the first sporting team to play to a full stadium in NSW following confirmation of Wednesday's announcement by the NSW Government.

"Tickets for Tuesday's T20 international sold out within hours when capacity was at 50 per cent, and we anticipate similarly high levels of interest when the new tickets are released. A series that has broken records on and off the field deserves a full house and that is exactly what we will have for the final T20." The NSW Government has been pivotal in cricket's big start to the summer. The state has come to the rescue to allow the Australian and Indian teams to train while in quarantine, and also hosted the successful WBBL season.

Gladys Berejiklian's 100 per cent stadium announcement comes into effect on Monday, and won't apply to the second T20 at the SCG, which takes place on Sunday.

Meanwhile, one of the biggest boxing events staged in Australia has just got bigger.

Dubbed the Sydney Super Fight, Tszyu will fight under lights on December 16 as part of a card involving the heavyweight showdown between Paul Gallen and Mark Hunt.

The easing of restrictions means up to 30,000 fans can now attend live when Tszyu takes his next step towards a world title against Morgan.

However, there will still be restrictions when it comes to the number of corporates who can attend those areas of the stadium that are indoors.

While a full house remains unlikely, event organisers have been buoyed by the opportunity to fit more spectators into the event.

MAJOR EVENTS FROM MONDAY CRICKET ■ Dec 8: Twenty20: Australia v India, SCG ■ Jan 7-11 Test Match: Australia v India, SCG BOXING ■ Dec 16: Tim Tszyu v Bowyn Brown/Paul Gallen v Mark Hunt, Bankwest Stadium A-LEAGUE ■ Dec 27: Western Sydney v Macarthur FC, Bankwest Stadium ■ Dec 30: Sydney FC v Melbourne City, ANZ Stadium ■ Jan 1: Western Sydney v Western United, Bankwest ■ Jan 3: Macarthur FC v Central Coast, Campbelltown Stadium