What's the worst thing you've seen on Instagram? Influencers flogging diet products? Photo shoots for pets? For the algorithm masters at the platform, it's nudity - specifically the nipple.

Ten years on from its launch and over one billion users later, Instagram still hasn't freed the nipple for its female users. But it has allowed the anti-vax movement to flourish.

In recent years, anti-vaxxers have slowly begun migrating from Facebook to Instagram (both companies are owned by Mark Zuckerberg, a CEO infamous for his reluctance to take action against spreaders of misinformation on either of his multi-billion dollar platforms). In recent months, their accounts have risen in popularity and follower count at an alarming speed thanks to their enthusiastic sharing of scientifically disproved theories on the origins, spread, and death rates of the coronavirus, which range from blaming 5G towers and Bill Gates for the virus, to suggesting vitamin C, silver and bleach as cures.

As of right now in Australia, the most notable peddler of corona-misinformation is Pete Evans, a chef with 235,000 followers and a penchant for vague captions like "who wants to go down the rabbit hole?" and hashtags like #nevergofullscience.

For the most part, users like Evans have circumvented Instagram's community guidelines by posting open-ended questions like "could this be true?", and using platform-friendly hashtags like #justasking to avoid detection. And until COVID-19, Instagram kept an eye on the movement and removed the occasional user. For the most part the growing community was left alone.

But with a global pandemic came an update to community guidelines across all major social platforms. YouTube, owned by Google, recognised the potential dangers early in the coronavirus outbreak and acted fast, announcing misinformation and con-spiracy theories would be removed. YouTube partnered with popular users to spread scientifically endorsed PSAs on how to keep safe, and provided links to authoritative sources in its home feed, under videos related to -coronavirus, and in searches.

But as seems to be a painful pattern, Facebook and Instagram appear less committed to actually enacting the guidelines. Facebook removed a post from Evans in April after the TGA fined him $25,000 for claims he made about a "biocharger", but last week Evans was back on Instagram talking about the biocharger again. Evans has also been busy misinforming his followers about COVID-19's fatality rate.

On May 21, Evans claimed the fatality rate was 1 per cent, when it was actually 6.5 per cent.

Two days later, he shared a post claiming the fatality rate was actually closer to 0.26 per cent.

Over 360,000 people have died from COVID-19. Those percentage differences, and Evans's blatant lack of regard for accurate information, matters. His willingness to spread lies when people's lives are at risk matters. His potential breach of guidelines matters. Instagram's response matters.

My worst ever Insta-moment? A chef turned TV star with no scientific or medical training saying the "overall death rate is meaningless". Much worse than a nipple.