ELECTRICITY grids, dams and telecommunications networks were all targets of the foreign hackers behind weeks of online attacks, experts say.

Industrial secrets which could give other countries an unfair advantage in trade talks were also the target of the major cyberattack that spanned all levels of government, businesses and political organisations.

Security sources believe China was to blame although the Morrison government has refrained from publicly naming the culprit, instead describing it as a "sophisticated state-based cyber actor".

Alastair MacGibbon, the federal Government's former cyber security tsar, described the attack as "aggressive" and said the hackers were potentially hunting for information which could help them commit "destructive acts" in the future.

"It strikes me as a strategic intelligence exercise on their part; find out as much as you can about Australia, steal trade secrets to help our country versus theirs," he said.

"Cyber is going to play very heavily in war, and it's obviously going to play very heavily in the lead-up to war.

"You need access in order to carry out destructive activities, and we need to get much smarter and better at -protecting our critical infrastructure.  "Cyber security is the greatest existential threat we're going to face." Mr MacGibbon said he was unsure which nation was behind the massive cyber-hit on Australia which also targeted essential services, critical infrastructure and the education sector, as well as government systems.

Yesterday China denied responsibility. "The attacks and the blame coming from this institute against China is totally baseless and nonsense," China Ministry of Foreign -Affairs spokesman Zhao Lijian said.

He said China was the "biggest victim of cyber attacks" and was committed to cyber security.

Australian security agencies have spent weeks using -offensive tactics to keep hackers out of companies and government computers.

The wave of cyber attacks comes one month after Australia won unanimous support for its bid to set up an independent probe into the origins of the COVID-19 pandemic. Australia's relationship with China was further strained by a recent trade dispute, travel bans and a warning from Beijing that tourists and students should reconsider coming to Australia. Canberra has also condemned the death sentence handed to Australian alleged drug smuggler Karm Gilespie as well as China's plan to impose a strict national security law on Hong Kong.