Three ways to restart comp

THE NRL's football innovation committee is weighing up three core season structures for the resumption of play, including one option that could mean the players are faced with the prospect of spending four months or more cut off from family and friends.

The Daily Telegraph understands the committee - codenamed Project Apollo - will take into account the costs and biosecurity demands of each option before rendering its verdict, most likely within weeks.

Crucially, it will also need the government to sanction the game's return. Provided that happens, the season is likely to take one of three forms.

The first option would involve kicking off the game's return with men's and women's State of Origin, before playing 23 rounds of the premiership - two rounds were played before the season was put on hold - plus finals and a grand final in December.

The second option would begin with the return of premiership matches before Origin is played at the back end of the year.

The final option would be to start as soon as possible and mix Origin into the premiership.

The NRL recently spoke about focusing on a 20-week competition in which each team would play the other once. However, it appears it hasn't ruled out a full season of premiership matches leading into the finals and a grand final close to Christmas.

That could require a significant sacrifice from a playing group that has already given up large chunks of money to ensure the game can survive.

The players have agreed to mammoth pay cuts while the game is on hold because of COVID-19, the relatively seamless negotiations over cuts in stark contrast to some other sports around the world, most notably the -English Premier League.

Premier League players are yet to agree to any pay cuts, which has left them wide open to criticism. The next challenge facing the NRL will be to convince the players to agree to isolation measures designed to prevent them contracting coronavirus when the competition resumes.

The NRL is considering placing teams in up to four -bubbles across the ACT, NSW and Queensland, where they would be kept at arm's length from the public as well as family.

Queensland remains the most -attractive option given the rate of -infection continues to dramatically slow. Yesterday, Queensland reported only nine new cases of COVID-19. NSW had 87 cases - the state's lowest daily count since March 21.

A full season could mean the players will be forced to confront the prospect of an extended time, most likely several months, away from their families and the wider community.

NRL'S GAME PLANS FOR 2020 SEASON * OPTION 1 - Season starts with four State of Origin games (men's and women's), followed by 23 rounds of the premiership, finals, grand final * OPTION 2 - Season starts with premiership games followed by finals and grand final. State of Origin at end of year* OPTION 3 - Season starts ASAP with premiership and State of Origin mixed together, followed by finals and grand final