LATRELL Mitchell is quickly becoming the fullback you thought he couldn't be. Or maybe it was your mate. Certainly, you knew someone who refused to believe, right?

We all did. But six rounds into the weirdest NRL season on record and Mitchell isn't only growing nicely into the South Sydney No. 1 jersey, but finding that other commodity so many thought impossible for him - consistency.

Against the Warriors last night, this most hyped of Roosters imports orchestrated two tries, was strong positionally, even saved a try on Warriors winger Dave Fusitu'a - albeit with a tackle that looked a tad, err, high.

And on that one, Mitchell was lucky not to be penalised.

May still be. Regardless, no onfield action was taken by referee Matt Cecchin, despite replays appearing to show Mitchell whack Fusitu'a around the melon as he stepped infield off his right foot at the try line. In his two try assists, the Bunnies No. 1 showed softer hands than those toilet rolls you fought over in the supermarket.

But on that try-line hit? Not so much.

Indeed, given Fusitu'a dropped to the ground, then dropped the ball, it may yet draw interest from the match review panel.

Still, it was a strong night for Mitchell. That most contentious of Kangaroos who, despite who knows how many headlines since the 2019 grand final, seems to have silenced those who thought him too heavy, too uninterested or simply not a No. 1.

Better, the strong performance follows on from consecutive strong showings against Melbourne and Gold Coast.

Last night's win, in front of 436 fans at Bankwest Stadium, is also the first time this season coach Wayne Bennett's side have secured consecutive wins.

MURRAY IN THE MIDDLE Cameron Murray is back in the middle and all is right with the world. Or certainly, getting better.

In his second game back from a brief fling on the Bunnies edges, the NSW Origin incumbent set up one try for Adam Reynolds and almost another for Braidon Burns with moments of skill.

He churned through 36 tackles, too. Big night also for Souths No. 6 Cody Walker, who scored one try, grubbered for another, busted tackles and all while also spending 10 minutes in the sin bin for a professional foul.

Elsewhere, Reynolds was strong, winger Alex Johnston scored a double, centre Campbell Graham made seven tackle busts and Tom Burgess ran for 164m.

The news, however, was not so good for prop Tom Amone, who left the field with what appeared to be a serious knee injury.

WARRIORS WOES Geez, the Warriors made some clangers. Like in the first half when, with the scores locked 6-all, the Aucklanders butchered two tries in as many sets.

Worse, the second was an intercept to Bunnies winger Dane Gagai, who ran 90m, was tackled, earned a penalty - which saw Kodi Nikorima binned - and then, Souths try.

Truly, within the space of 60 seconds the Warriors not only cost themselves a 12-point swing but a playmaker.

Which, of course, is tough to see. Especially given how much this mob is giving up to keep the NRL alive.

HONOURABLE MENTION With COVID-19 restrictions, there are plenty of ways to go crazy this weekend. But, please, take the time to buy a beanie.

RABBITOHS 40 WARRIORS 12 SOUTH SYDNEY TRIES:A JOHNSTON 2, C WALKER, D COOK, B BURNS, C GRAHAM, A REYNOLDS GOALS: A REYNOLDS 6 NEW ZEALAND TRIES: D FUSITUA, A PAASI GOALS: K NIKORIMA 2