NSW's in-form stars light up NRL to leave Queensland in state of disarray

FORMER independent commission boss John Grantonce insulted NSW by declaring Queensland was the true heartland of rugby league.

Yet at the halfway mark of the NRL season, the state's three teams are hopelessly off the pace and already out of -finals contention.

The Broncos, Titans and Cowboys were flogged over the weekend by a combined score of 112-16.

You go through the form at every club and not one current Queensland Origin player would be in contention to win a Dally M positional award.

Lucky they have Harry Grant at the Wests Tigers coming through. The NRL's new rules have thrown up new contenders for the Dally M team of the year as the premiership hits the halfway mark.

If positional awards were being handed out on form from the opening 10 rounds of the competition, this is how it would look. It's painful reading for -Maroons fans.

FULLBACKS Contenders: James Tedesco, Clint -Gutherson, Ryan Papenhuyzen Parramatta skipper Gutherson has been the most consistent of the lot. His fantastic form at the back is one of the major reasons behind Parra-matta's magnificent start to the competition, despite the hiccup against Manly on Saturday night.

Papenhuyzen could not have been more impressive at Melbourne Storm. His try against the Raiders was pure skill and speed. He is a freakish talent.

Tedesco has missed three games but has played a number of blinders to retain his rating as the game's best football player.

THE WINNER: James Tedesco

WINGERS Contenders: Maika Sivo, Brett Morris, David Nofoaluma Morris turns 34 next month but is still playing some of the best football of his career. Has scored nine tries and his defence has been outstanding.

Nofoaluma has also scored nine tries. He's a danger whenever he touches the ball and his feat is more impressive considering the Tigers' attack is not as spectacular as their rivals.

Sivo has been a one-man wrecking ball. He's impossible to contain once he winds up on the left side for the Parramatta Eels.

THE WINNER: Maika Sivo

CENTRES Contenders: Josh Morris, Stephen Crichton, Joey Manu, Bradman Best, Michael Jennings One of the more difficult positions to rate. Like his brother, Josh Morris has been sensational.

Manu had a poor game for the Roosters against the Raiders but has been otherwise exceptional.

At the Knights, Best has burst onto the scene in spectacular fashion. He destroyed South Sydney's right edge on Saturday night, while his opposite James Roberts missed six tackles.

Jennings, at 32, just keeps on producing - like the Morris twins. And Crichton at the Panthers has been the find of the season alongside Harry Grant.

THE WINNER: Stephen Crichton

FIVE-EIGHTHS Contenders: Luke Keary, Jack Wighton, Dylan Brown Brown has been super impressive at the Eels, especially in the absence of Mitch Moses.

Then it's a coin toss. How can you possibly split two champions - Keary and Wighton.

Wighton took on more respons-ibility without Josh Hodgson and led the Raiders to victory over the Roosters on Thursday night in an SCG -boilover.

Keary has been the best player in the competition since the COVID-19 resumption. THE WINNER: Luke Keary

HALFBACKS Contenders: Nathan Cleary, Mitch Moses, George Williams, Mitchell Pearce Another tough one. Cleary missed rounds three and four while suspended and gave Moses a big head start. However, Moses has missed the past three games and there's little between them.

Their battle for the State of Origin Blues jersey with Pearce during the finals will make big headlines. Pearce had a blinder on Saturday against Adam Reynolds behind a dominant pack.

At the Canberra Raiders, Williams has settled in beautifully.He is a quality playmaker and can sniff a try from anywhere.

THE WINNER: Nathan Cleary

HOOKERS Contenders: Harry Grant, Apisai -Koroisau, Cameron Smith It's hard to believe Origin and Kangaroos hooker Damien Cook isn't among the contenders. He hasn't played poorly but not been as effective as in recent seasons despite a big final 15 minutes against the Knights. Smith is having yet another great year but more recently in the halves.

Koroisau has been more responsible for the Penrith Panthers' revival than any other player.

And at the Wests Tigers, Grant has remarkably emerged as a likely Origin hooker just 10 rounds into the season. He is the complete footballer.

THE WINNER: Harry Grant

FRONT-ROWERS Contenders: James Fisher-Harris, Junior Paulo, Reagan Campbell--Gillard, Siosiua Taukeiaho Until Saturday night at Brookvale Oval, Parramatta bookends Paulo and Campbell-Gillard had been -unstoppable.

Taukeiaho at the Roosters is playing powerfully every week. At the Panthers, big Fisher-Harris has laid the foundations for his team's success.

He has always been a good front-rower … now he's a great one. James Tamou has also played a dominating role.

THE WINNER: James Fisher-Harris

SECOND-ROWERS Contenders: Viliame Kikau, Ryan Matterson, Shaun Lane, Luke Garner Manly junior Garner has been a powerhouse at the Wests Tigers. He could be a bolter for Origin if the club is playing finals football. He's tough, strong and fast. At Parramatta, both edge forward Matterson and Lane have been dominating the competition. On Saturday night we saw how badly the Eels missed Matterson.

At Penrith, big Kikau is a barnstorming threat every time he touches the ball. He's also added new skills to his game, as we saw with the spectacular round-six try against the Storm.

THE WINNER: Viliame Kikau

LOCKS Contenders: Isaah Yeo, Jason Taumalolo, Nathan Brown, Jake Trbojevic and Joe Tapine.

Brown has played only six of 10 games for the Eels but has been among the best forwards in the competition. Taumalolo hasn't been quite as dominant in a struggling Cowboys side.

Tapine at the Raiders is strong and skilful every week, while Manly's Trbojevic is the most consistent and wholehearted 80-minute player in the competition.

At the Panthers, Yeo is the most underrated forward in the NRL. Just like Tapine - tough with beautiful skills.

THE WINNER: Nathan Brown

HIGHLIGHT South Sydney's stunning final 15 minutes against the Knights, with three glorious tries that turned the game into a heart-stopping thriller and a result the never-say-die Rabbitohs very nearly pinched.

LOWLIGHT Channel 9 handed out its VB Hard Earned Award on Friday night to Broncos front-rower Payne Haas despite his side being flogged 48-0 by the Wests Tigers. Seriously, what game were they watching? Haas wasn't even among the top dozen players. This is a complete farce.

LOWLIGHT II The referees' refusal to use the sin bin for blatant foul-play incidents. Bulldogs half Kieran Foran was hit high and late by Tariq Sims and had to be taken off for an HIA. Sims stayed on the field. Foran didn't return.

SPOTTED Former Channel 9 Footy Show star Beau Ryan on the Gold Coast enjoying the school holidays with his family.

SPOTTED II The great Kiwi halfback Gary Freeman still playing lower grade rugby union at 58 for Beecroft. There's mail he even got a yellow card. Onya Whiz.

SPOTTED III The Knights' Adam O'Brien throwing out a challenge to Craig Bellamy as the maddest NRL coach with his box antics against the Rabbitohs on Saturday night.

SHOOSH Having already signed Nick Cotric, the Bulldogs are now considering an approach to injury-prone Brisbane Broncos star Jack Bird to switch to Belmore next year.

ROUGH INITIATION It was a tough afternoon for caretaker Bulldogs coach Steve Georgallis in Wollongong on Saturday. The TV feed into the coach's box wasn't working and he missed a number of crucial replays.

360 VIEW Catch you tonight on NRL 360 on Fox Sports at 6.30pm with Ben Ikin, Paul Kent and James Hooper to discuss all the biggest issues from round 10 of the competition.

2019 DALLY TEAM OF THE YEAR Fullback: James Tedesco (still the one) Wing: Ken Maumalo (only three tries this year) Centre: Latrell Mitchell (moved to fullback) Five-eighth: Cameron Munster (been injured) Halfback: Mitchell Moses (missed last three) Hooker: Cameron Smith (playing in halves) Prop: Payne Haas (lost form) Second row: John Bateman (been injured) Lock: Cameron Murray (not as dominant)