IT'S TIME TO CLOSE THE BORDER If the Melbourne hotspot suburbs are supposed to be in lockdown, then how on Earth did people get out of their suburb and into Sydney ("Bordering on madness", 3/7)?

If they flew then is no one checking IDs at Melbourne airport? They must have security at the entrance and anyone from the suburbs in question must be refused entry to the airport and the police called.

Not only are they risking infecting innocent bystanders at the airport, but a plane full of passengers and staff who could then do another flight compromising hundreds more.  What part of this do Victorians not understand?

Alison Campbell, Ballina

Victorian Premier Daniel Andrews really needs to close the border to NSW. By not doing so he is endangering the lives of the NSW people when the Victorians come over here by either plane or train.

All travel should now be forbidden between these two states and lockdown to occur throughout Victoria.

NSW Premier Gladys Ms Berejiklian needs to close our borders, too, in order to keep the virus out of here and to protect us from what's happening in Victoria.

Please Premiers, see common sense and close the border until the seriousness of this virus calms down. If other states can close borders, so can you.

Diana McCarty, Emus Plains

Advice from China not really needed First it was China attempting to punish Australia with economic sanctions and increasing propaganda persuading students and tourists not to come here, and now Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian has told Australia we should refrain from purchasing unnecessary military equipment and upgrading our missile range ("Beijing orders Australia not to stockpile weapons", 3/7).

Of course Australia has to adjust its military capabilities and strategy in response to China's military build-up under Xi Jinping's rule.

China has increased the size of the navy and air force and established a strategic support force that focuses on space, cyber and electronics warfare.

China has primarily relied on its economic power to cultivate its neighbours, including Australia. However, these countries remain wary of China's authoritarian system, which is becoming aggressive and assertive.

After China slammed Foreign Minister Marise Payne for meddling in Hong Kong's internal affairs, Australia's response to China over the government's announcement of modernising our military capability is for China to "butt out".

Warren Cato, Manyana

Sovereign rights The arrogance of China's Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian to order Australia not to stockpile weapons and all countries should avoid an arms race ("Beijing orders Australia not to stockpile weapons", 3/7). Australia has every right to protect its sovereignty from hostile and aggressive nations threatening our security.

The wolf in sheep's clothing is lurking on borders across the Indo-Pacific, and perhaps they should practise what they preach.

Graeme Hodder, Callala Bay

Gender mender If the belief that chromosomes determine biological gender, as distinct from psychological gender, is "biological determinism" then I must be a biological determinist ("Kevin Donnelly - Reason lost in transition", 3/7).

This does not mean I am transphobic. I am just stating a fact. The transgender community makes up less than 1 per cent of society and yet we are all supposed to change everything for the sake of such a small minority.

Children are to be brainwashedin schools about gender fluidity before they have a chance to know what gender is.

Transgender women have the right to compete in women's sports with the advantage of a male physique and testosterone. If a biological sportswoman takes testosterone, she is a cheat.

I think it is about time that the 99 per cent stopped worrying about being labelled a transphobic, heteronormative, capitalist society and started worrying about the lunacy that is currently prevailing.

Being labelled transphobic if one dares to utter a different viewpoint from theirs is the same as being labelled racist if one comments on the troubles within other communities. Speaking sense doesn't a transphobe or racist make.

Jeanette Dixon, Casula

Taking a toll The NSW government certainly has toll mania ("Glad's slip takes a toll", 2/7). It is giving away $540 in rego tax for spending over $1300 a year in tolls, which might all be paid to a private company.

For an increasing number of people, tolls are by far their biggest transport expense. Worse, you can really only travel east-west on a train in Western Sydney without a gigantic detour.

Worse again, we are really only building motorways this century when most developed countries built them toll-free in the last century.

Government finances would be better off if the tolls were halved but never privatised.

Peter Egan, Artarmon

Tracking system Corona-tracking Woolworths send staff home and warn customers who have had contact there to be checked ("Balmain bug bungles", 3/7). Why wouldn't all shops utilise their loyalty cards for identifying those at risk?

It could also be used to make sure that the product limits are adhered to. Patrick, Pennant Hills

Plant a seed and ...

The new Australian Made logo, which looks less wattle and more dandelion, is insipid in appearance and symbolism.

Blowing on a dried dandelion flower will disperse its seeds. Never mind that they'll land somewhere and very likely sprout new plants; more important is the fact that the flower can disintegrate with one small puff.

Is that the image we want to present to the world?

Paula Houseman, Kensington

Briefly ...

The Chinese CCP need not worry about our new missiles carrying nuclear warheads because they will have something much worse - COVID-19 ("Meanwhile, in China", 3/7).

David Penn, Online

* * * I see China is telling our Foreign Minister to butt out of their affairs regarding Hong Kong and in the same breath telling us not to improve our defence. How about they butt out of our affairs? I'm glad we have a strong Prime Minister.

Judith Morton, Kariong

* * * Knowing the origin of the new ridiculous supposedly Aussie logo, I feel it would really only require the approval of the Chinese ("Our new logo just plain loco", 2/7). I just hope good money wasn't used to produce something that is not as good as what my four-year-old grandson brings home from kindy.

Barry Laurie, Tweed Heads

* * * An excellent article by Kevin Donnelly re transgenderism ("Reason lost in transition", 3/7). I was shocked to learn that the Safe Schools program is still being taught in schools, and even more so that the Coalition federal government is funding it. Abolish it now.

Paul Sobb, Cammeray

* * * Dairy farms in Australia are closing down at an alarming rate and unless we want to drink imported milk the government should intervene in this failed market and compel much higher farm-gate prices.

Rod Matthews, Fairfield, Vic

HAVE YOUR SAYMAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001