MARK O'Meley knows exactly how Queensland forward Tino Fa'asuamaleaui feels. "As coach, I had Payne Haas in the under-18s NSW side," O'Meley said. "We were doing some padwork and he ran straight over me." Little did the former Test, NSW, Canterbury and Roosters prop know, Haas, the fearless Blues bull, was merely trying to impress his hero.

"Ogre (O'Meley) was a warhorse and kept coming all day," Haas said when he asked who he looked up to ahead of his much-anticipated rematch with Fa'asuamaleaui tonight.

"Glenn Lazarus was also a freak. I always watch their old videos. "Those guys who paved the way for us forwards now, we (NSW forward pack) now have to leave the jersey in a better place than they did. '' All eyes will be on Haas and Fa'asuamaleaui after the two traded blows in Origin II.

O'Meley, the Blues COVID-19 officer in camp, smiled when asked if he expected more fireworks.

"It was good to see that Origin spirit, but there wasn't really much in it," said O'Meley, who played 10 games for NSW.

"It was just great to see two young guys going head to head. "It's Origin, it's a different beast.

"Obviously Tino's manager got under Payne's skin (with comments made pre-match) a bit and he reacted and that's how it works.

"Hopefully this time they concentrate on footy, but it obviously adds to the drama." O'Meley said he was proud that Haas looked up to him with a desire to maintain pride in the Blues jersey.

"I've coached Payne a few times now, through the juniors," O'Meley said. "He's a very nice kid who's been raised really respectfully. "We've got some good young players, Saf (Daniel Saifiti) is going really well and Payne is standing up and starting to see how great and how powerful he can be in the Origin arena which is different to NRL.

"He's always been a big powerful thing.

"He's a talent and he's just slowly opening doors, there's so much potential." The Suncorp Stadium decider will mark the biggest game of Haas' burgeoning career and the 20-year-old -acknowledges the Maroons will be a much better side on their home soil.

"It's hard to win up there, especially against Queensland," Haas said. "They always turn up, like we turn up here (Sydney). It is going to be a really tough game. "We can't try to fancy our way through them. If we weather the storm, I think we can get the job done."