Ships rescue mission the right move I expect that many Sydney-siders share my discomfort with the state's management of six passenger liners in our coastal waters (Plea to save our souls, 1/4).

Treated as lepers, they are being refused port access or passenger disembarkation.

Their captains don't wish to sail away from access to ICUs with multiple sick passengers.

A plan for their urgent repatriation with currently idle Qantas aircraft might be costly, but the prestige from international publicity would prove an excellent campaign for advertising Australian tourism in the future.

The goodwill generated with the world's cruise liners is an opportunity not to be missed.

We cannot turn our backs on so many helpless people.

Alan Sexton, North Parramatta

Post-COVID revival needs to be made in Australia Business columnist Terry McCrann rightly calls for a post COVID-19 exit strategy - a plan for the government and the RBA to "unwind all their stimulus" (Enough stimulus, now for exit strategy, 1/4).

But an exit strategy must go further. We need to pay down the resulting crippling debt and eliminate our reliance on China which has been exposed as high-risk and a folly that will saddle Australia with a generation of debilitating debt to repay.

The time is right for PM Scott Morrison to resurrect Australia's manufacturing capability and re-establish its self-reliance.

Cheap energy enabled China to be a global manufacturing powerhouse. Now, Australia must embrace its abundance of low cost/high quality energy - coal and uranium - and, for the foreseeable future, abandon the ideological absurdity of high-cost, unreliable renewable energy that has progressively driven up energy costs and forced manufacturing offshore.

Bob Partington, Wahroonga

Life's little pleasures When this contagion passes it might hopefully usher in a new era of appreciation of what we all took for granted - visits to and from family and friends, the value of extended reading, the pleasures of the garden and its wildlife, and so much more.

We might also look forward to governments not being able to win votes so easily by propping up the rich at the expense of the poor, denigrating minorities and belittling the indigent.

Ron Sinclair, Bathurst

Qantas is Virgin on selfish In opposing the federal bailout of Virgin Australia, Qantas is hardly acting like the "spirit of Australia" (Help one, help all: Qantas, 1/4).

Virgin Australia has said that it requires an emergency bailout for its survival. Qantas has it all wrong when it argues that Virgin should not receive extra help.

Right now, the issue is not which companies are better managed. The critical issue is sustaining the economy This is not a matter of Qantas vs Virgin - this is a matter of avoiding severe recession or depression.

Once large companies begin to fail, the failures spiral so that even more companies fail and more people become unemployed.

Right now, through massive infusions of cash to stabilise employment until the crisis is over, the federal government is doing what's right for the country.

As a future traveller, I won't quickly forget the selfish behaviour exhibited by Qantas.

Harry Melkonian, Vaucluse

Back words with action Our government is certainly making brave statements like "those found buying and shipping PPE and other essential equipment used to fight COVID-19 to other countries" face a five-year jail sentence (The mask avengers, 1/4).

Wow, what brave words to use considering a five-year sentence will likely never be used.

Maybe if it was made mandatory and if used for the first offender it may deter the second offender.

Until it is used, it is a meaningless statement.

Jim, Wollongong

Bitter truth unmasked Tons of medical equipment vital to Australia's battle during the global pandemic spirited back to China by companies associated with its government (The mask avengers, 1/4).

This should be a massive wake-up call to not only our government but all Australians as to our place in the Chinese government's pecking order.

The message is, the Chinese government will plunder our resources as their need arises - regardless of our needs.

However, any criticism of the Chinese superpower will be met by the usual suspects trying to stifle legitimate debate by using the tiresome one-word fallback for those without an original opinion - xenophobia.

I have great faith the Morrison government will take the necessary steps to protect Australia's national strategic resources and guarantee a strong and independent future for coming generations.

There is no need for "xenophobia" to enter this discussion as it's not the Chinese people that's the problem, it's their ruthless government.

Bruce Collison, Banks, ACT

Protect our property I was concerned to read that on the one hand you have the federal government putting limits on foreign investment during the current health crisis (Safeguard for Aussie assets at crisis time, 30/4), yet an article on real estate agents highlighted their keenness to market our homes overseas to compensate for a slowing of domestic sales and thus agents' sales commissions (China eyes our assets, 1/4).

I worry that some struggling Australians could be convinced to sell at any price and then live to regret such a decision?

I'm not allowed to own property in China for example. Why can they buy property here?

Dave Buckeridge, Dudley

Saving the Origin Here's my solution to save State of Origin - and our sanity. A team of 25 players are chosen for each state and these players and any staff, referees etc are tested before entering 14 days quarantine in Brisbane. Another test is conducted on the day of the game.

Game 1 is played on a Friday night in Brisbane. After the game they are flown on a charter plane to a quarantine centre where they are again tested for COVID-19.

Game 2 is played on the Wednesday night in Sydney with players and staff returning to quarantine where they continue training for Game 3 on Sunday.

While there would be no crowds at the games it would get huge TV ratings and keep the footy-loving public half sane.

Col, Blacksmiths

Briefly … With taxpayers struggling financially, where are the pollies and bureaucrats with their current untouchable wages? Surely a 50 per cent cut would be the first step.

Nev, Menai "" " As there are no new sporting clashes to show on TV is there any chance the free-to-air stations could play some classic games from the past?

Alan Wright, Grafton "" " Where have the climate change protesters gone? Also it's worth noting … no riots in Hong Kong, no protests in Paris, no terrorism anywhere. Just proves what a bunch of scaredy cats they all are.

Paul Blakeney, Glebe "" " I wonder if those whingeing returning travellers who have been "incarcerated" in five-star hotels would like some cheese and biscuits with their whine?

Allan Brooker, Belfield "" " Please stop these real estate agents from selling us out (China eyes our assets, 1/4).

Ron, Erina "" " Thanks to all the staff maintaining production and distribution of The Daily Telegraph. It is great to have my favourite newspaper still available every day and the Hibernation section has been a lovely bonus.

Jennifer, Westleigh

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily TelegraphGPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001