Dangers of California dreamin' Tim Blair speaks only the truth about the energy fiasco in California caused by the fact-free, ideologically driven, cult- like beliefs being pushed here by wealthy devotees of the Church of Climatology like Zali Steggall (Zali's doomed dream - Opinion, 27/12).

This prompts the question: will the new year bring some sanity to the climate and energy situation in Australia, or will we continue to be influenced by the noisy minority with no understanding of the physics, engineering and economics behind provision of affordable power?

Or will our politicians stay deaf to reality yet again and turn us into another California.?

Doug Hurst, Chapman, ACT "" " Tim Blair is an entertaining writer but he is wrong about nuclear power for Australia (Zali's doomed dream - Opinion, 28/12). Rather, Australia is one of the best places in the world for solar energy.

Geoscience Australia estimates that the solar radiation received annually contains 10,000 times more energy than what the country uses. Yet surprisingly we still generate fewer MWh per annum from solar than even the UK or Italy, so there is plenty of room for growth.

Perhaps Zali could take Tim for a spin when she buys her EV. Maybe like a car-mad friend of mine, he will become a convert.

Ray Peck, Hawthorn, Victoria

No point whining, when danger is heartbeat away Whingers complaining about the cancellation of events during this pandemic should grow up.

Anyone who has been keeping up with coronavirus events overseas, particularly the new mutated strain of the virus, will understand how we are still not out of the woods.

Closer to home Victoria was locked down due to it getting out of control. The northern beaches cluster is still causing concern as they have been unable to trace the source of the infection. NSW health has so far been able to catch other outbreaks across Sydney (Baffling puzzle of cluster's origins, 28/12).

Congratulations to the large numbers who have been tested. Unfortunately we have the young, silly and others that think it's OK to still have house and beach parties (Dreadful hangover of illegal parties, 28/12).

Cancelling the Sydney Hobart race was being proactive. Imagine if participants became sick or Tasmania closed access just in case and told the yachties to go back to where they came from.

Even New Year's Eve will be different this year to keep everyone safe (NYE restrictions announced by Gladys Berejiklian - Online, 28/12).

It is better to err on the side of caution than to deal with the headache when something goes wrong.

Joe Kovac, Prestons

In awe of ingenuity The December 11 decision by the federal government and pharmaceutical company CSL to end trials by the University of Queensland of a promising COVID-19 vaccine was both disappointing and reassuring.

Disappointing because the vaccine showed considerable promise, but reassuring because it showed that the responsible entities had an appropriately low risk tolerance.

Now the disappointment can be replaced by hope and optimism, with the very welcome news that the vaccine developed by Oxford University and pharmaceutical company AstraZeneca will be manufactured in Australia by Australian-born pharmaceutical company CSL (Oz-made vaccine is a winner, 28/12).

There seems to be no end to human ingenuity, especially in an emergency. Douglas Mackenzie, Deakin, ACT

Judging the judges Judges having a lend of us is nothing new - it has ever been thus. The judiciary is accountable to no one except themselves and their exclusive "club" (Justice delayed as judges on leave; 28/12).

It's time federal and state parliaments reviewed the arrangements for the appointment of judges in the various courts to deliver greater transparency and accountability.

Given the number of legal professionals who sit in these places, however, the task will not be an easy one.

There is also likely to be a reluctance to tread upon such sacred turf. John George, Terrigal

Boldly researching ...

Next-generation research is set to take on a whole new meaning with a study dubbed GenV set to track up to 150,000 newborns from birth to old age, examining every aspect of their health and wellbeing (Oh baby! A study to last a lifetime, 28/12).

The bold undertaking is expected to put Australian medical research at the forefront for decades to come.

Australia it seems does not need a starship to boldly go where no one has gone before.

Peter Penglis, Kambah, ACT

Euthanasia plebiscite With a new poll showing more than 70 per cent of NSW voters support voluntary assisted dying laws, euthanasia should not be left to politicians (NSW ready for die laws 27/12).

Best to have a plebiscite with the next election for voters to decide whether to legalise voluntary euthanasia.

Any proposed euthanasia laws must have strict guidelines so they can provide the appropriate balance to ensure that terminal long-suffering patients are empowered with the humane option to avoid a senseless painful death, that also impacts negatively on loved ones and friends.

What is life when there is no quality of life at all?

As Stephen Hawking once asked: "We don't let animals suffer, so why humans?" Steve Ngeow, Chatswood

Stumped by logic Australia's bowling attack was acclaimed as "the best ever" after its demolition of the Indian batting line up in the first Test, after the batting line-up seemed out of sorts with replacements for injured players in the top order.

Move forward to the Boxing Day Test, same "best ever" bowlers in the Aussie team and same nervous replacements in Australia's batting top order trying to impress selectors and guess what? Australia wins the toss and decides to bat and not bowl first (Holiday hangover, 27/12).

Has the "bubble" exhausted the oxygen from our decision makers? Bill Donovan, Port Macquarie

Dire year's fine leadership So, only a few days left in this year - which has delivered nothing but disaster for most of it.

We have had bushfire, flood and this COVID virus ruin many people's lives. So many will need years to get back to a normal life.

Lucky we have a very good PM in Scott Morrison and a good premier in Gladys Berejiklian. They have guided us with the correct decisions.

Hopefully this new vaccine will work. Wishing everybody a very happy antiviral 2021.

George Orban, Breakfast Point

Briefly ...

So, flying foxes with lyssavirus have been responsible for three deaths in the last 24 years, prompting a warning from Queensland Health (Bat virus alarm, 28/12). Seems to be overkill, just like their border closures to greater Sydney and the Blue Mountains.

Alyn, Penrith "" " Why waste millions of dollars in fireworks on New Year's Eve when no one can watch them, when we can wait just another few months and have a real celebration when we are all vaccinated. Seems to me to be a better reason for a celebration.

Ed Ginns, Londonderry "" " The people of NSW are being treated like an unimportant minority voice on the issue of voluntary assisted dying despite more than 70 per cent favouring the ability to die with dignity (NSW ready for die laws, 27/12). When did the church become the majority?

Janet Edwards, Kingsford

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001