LATRELL'S CRITICS WRONG: INGLIS GREG Inglis has hit back at critics of Latrell Mitchell, saying he will make the fullback position "his own" at Souths as he comes back from an injury-interrupted season.

The former NRL star, who has moved to England to play with Warrington Wolves in the Super League, dismissed claims over Mitchell's suitability for the position.

Channel 9 commentator Phil Gould has said Mitchell doesn't have the "intensity to play fullback", while Andrew Johns said in September he had been wrong to say that Mitchell was a centre, not a fullback.

Inglis, who was a development coach at Souths last season, said Mitchell would shine this year after recovering from a hamstring injury.

"One thing that I said when we signed Latrell is that he's a natural footballer, he can pass, he can run, he can meet the game," he said.

"He'll make his transition to fullback his own, he will play it in his right way and that's just something that he'll do." Inglis, who turns 34 on Friday, said Mitchell did not listen to the noise outside the Rabbitohs.

"Again the pressure of the media over there is just all going to be about Latrell, Latrell, Latrell - is he going to be right in this position, he should go back to centre," he said.

"The coaches there know what Latrell's capable of, Latrell knows what he's capable of and Latrell will make that position his own.

"He's obviously had a disrupted year with his hamstring last year and surgery but I still have chats to him and see how he's going." Inglis played 263 games in the NRL, at the Melbourne Storm and then the Rabbitohs, including the 2014 premiership.

His early retirement surprised the rugby league world, which he initially blamed on injuries before later revealing he had been suffering depression and had been diagnosed with bipolar.

He had patches where he'd been drinking too much alcohol - up to three bottles of wine on a Friday night - but has now been looking after himself.

Inglis said he was feeling better, and was open to discussing mental health, which he does through his charity the Goanna Academy.

He arrived in England this month, where it snowed in his first week, but has been keeping up with the academy's work via late-night Zoom calls.

"I just tapped into the schools about it (mental health). It's getting teachers, parents, adults to understand and look out for the signs," he said.

"Actually it's OK to talk about stuff, it's not something you should shy away from, that's one thing I'm very passionate about is actually breaking down the stigma of mental health, especially in young men." Inglis, who was a State of Origin star in his 32 caps for Queensland, follows in Alfie Langer's footsteps in the move to Warrington.

However, there was no chance he was going back to play representative football again, he said.

The door was also shut on an NRL comeback, even if his form justified it after a one-year deal at Warrington.

Inglis' Souths teammate Jason Clark, who plays at Warrington, encouraged him to come across to the north of England.

He managed to get there despite the restrictions in place from COVID-19, which has made -international travel extremely difficult.

Inglis said he wanted to play again because he had fallen back in love with the game after coaching last year but warned it would take five or six games before he was back at his best.

Inglis said he knew there would be fierce competition on the field, and that he was ready for anything the Super League could throw at him.

"I know there is going to be a target on my head but that's just how it's got to be and that's what I'm expecting anyway," he said.

His famous goanna try celebration might also make a comeback. "Over here, it depends how wet it is, it could turn into a slug that crashes into a fence," he laughed.