THE NRL is paying for babysitting to help the wives and partners of players, just one of many contributions to the enormous cost of running the competition during a pandemic.

It can be revealed it is costing a massive $20 million to keep the NRL season going under COVID-19 restrictions.

The code was one of the first sports in the world to return to competition on May 28.

But to achieve that the NRL needed to leave no stone unturned in protecting the health and safety of players, staff, clubs and the community.

The NRL had budgeted for a $16 million COVID spend but after just six weeks of footy, that figure is expected to rise to $20 million due to shifting Melbourne Storm into Queensland.

Charter flights for teams going interstate for matches and the hiring of biosecurity personnel at every game are also responsible for the NRL's huge weekly outlay.

The decision to house the Warriors on the Central Coast and the Melbourne Storm on the Sunshine Coast, and even pay $1000-a-month nanny service for wives and partners at home in New Zealand, are also part of the spend.

The Warriors' team of -almost 50 players and staff have been in NSW for the past two months, spending the majority of that time at Terrigal.

The Storm were forced to leave Victoria last week for the Sunshine Coast, where they could stay for the rest of the season.

Despite the multimillion-dollar outlay, it is still far below the NRL's initial fear that the game would haemorrhage $500 million by suspending the entire season.

ARL Commission boss Peter V'landys said ticket sales from the return of crowds, plus the rescheduled State of Origin series, would aid the game's financial recovery.

"In order to put in place the strictest of biosecurity measures, the costs we have to bear to play the game are between $16 and $20 million," he said.

"We can't operate without those measures.

"The majority of those costs are the Warriors, the chartered flights for teams and the biosecurity officers. The Storm now being based on the Sunshine Coast will also contribute to that cost.

"We're abiding by the biosecurity rules by the fact we're crossing every 'i' and every 't'.

"As you saw when we stood down Canterbury's Aiden Tolman a few weeks ago after a COVID scare, we immediately took action.

"The cost is all part of keeping the competition going.

"We're doing everything we can to keep the spirit and the morale up of everybody.

"Because we were able to get the competition back by May 28 and the crowds back sooner than what we budgeted for, things are looking better. "We're still going to make a hefty loss, but it's nowhere near the original $500 -million."