Fight Beijing's bullies with Oz wine purchases

IT'S home to some of the most-recognised brand names in Australia, like Penfolds, Lehmann, Jacob's Creek and Tyrell's and is worth $6.3 billion each year.

But now it's up to everyday Aussie revellers to get behind our wine sector with thousands of local producers' livelihoods on the line thanks to a "bullying" Beijing's trade brinkmanship after what has already been a horror period for the beleaguered industry.

Aussie winemakers have battled years of drought, the 2019 Black Summer bushfires and the coronavirus pandemic only to now face Chinese tariffs of up to 200 per cent exacting a chokehold on what is our country's fifth-largest export industry.

The latest attack is a part of the ongoing Australian-Chinese trade war, with the communist nation already imposing 80 per cent tariffs on barley and banning imports from six Australian beef suppliers in the wake of the federal government's international call for an inquiry into the origins of COVID-19.

So wine industry bosses are now urging locals to show their support by celebrating with homegrown wine this festive season instead of more expensive exported products.

The call-to-arms came with Tyrrell's Wines chief executive Bruce Tyrrell slamming China for imposing the crippling new tariffs on producers and acting like "the big bully in the schoolyard".

"There is only one way to fix that and that's to stand up to it," he said. "There are a number of producers out there whose businesses are largely China-based and now their market is gone … (But) we don't need to be afraid of China.

"The current government in China is not 100 per cent secure and there is growing opposition to it.

"It's wonderful for people to support their own people and most of us are doing it naturally. This China situation will prod those who aren't already to also back local suppliers." Australian Grape and Wine chief executive Tony Battaglene said considering the Chinese tariffs, it was crucial that locals helped producers get through the supply that can now not be exported.

"It's been a pretty tough year with the bushfires and smoke and COVID," he said. "Now, with China the big concern is that it impacts about 2400 producers. We need people to try and get through this year's supply as much as possible.

"There is no doubt now that there are political motivations behind this and (China's tactics) are going across the agriculture sector. They are clearly trying to put a lot of pressure on our -producers.

"China is a $1.2 billion market and that is a lot of wine to try and move into other markets.

"We hope everyone gives a case of wine to their friends for Christmas to try and help producers." Peak body Wine Australia said such calls were particularly important given the horror run some producers were only just recovering from.

"Unfortunately, the tariffs come off the back of a year where wineries in some regions have been affected by fires and, more broadly, by the restrictions on cellar doors (imposed by COVID-19 safeguards)," a spokeswoman said.

"The best thing to do this Christmas is buy Australian and, if (people) get the opportunity, please do go out and explore the many brilliant regions and get to know some wineries first-hand." Harkham Wines owner Richard Harkham lost 80 per cent of his produce due to bushfire smoke and hopes locals will step up and support the industry in the face of China's actions.

"As a nation we've endured a lot over the past few years so it's really important that we support each other," he said.

"You have to support your family first. When we sell our wine in Australia, we make a lot more revenue than when we sell overseas due to the added costs involved. This is the time we need to rally together to get through what's happening." Iron Gate Estate director and general manager Gavin Kuo also said support from locals is what can keep -smaller wineries alive in the face of growing international competition.

"We are hoping people will help us survive and we need people to keep drinking local wine. With the bushfires and COVID and people not able to come out to wine country during last year's peak season - we were heavily impacted," he said. "Now if people drink our wine and come down and support us, it will give us a fighting chance to recuperate what we have lost in the last four to five years." Hunter Valley winemaker Geoff Krieger, of Brokenwood Wines, agreed buying local was vital right now.

"Whether it's a bottle of Hunter Valley semillon or Hunter Valley Shiraz or gifting your friends and experience to come and see us, now is the time to eat, drink and experience from your own backyard," he said.

Mudgee local Tristan Clarke said he's looking forward to travelling to wine regions across the country to help support the industry in light of borders opening.

"I'm a big wine drinker and I will 100 per cent continue to drink Australian-grown wine this summer. After the year we've had, there has never been a better time to drink local," he said.

"I plan on visiting Orange very soon and now that state borders have opened up, I'm looking into going down to Victoria's wine regions too." To help back Australian wine producers, The Daily Telegraph is offering readers the delicious. Drink Delivered Australian wines offer to help buy local and support the sector. The offer is a mixed case of all Australian wines, with most of the wines from smaller estate wineries around the country. The case of 12 mixed wines, plus two free Tyrrell's sparkling wines will cost just $139.99. Order now to get your wine by Christmas through www.ddd.wine/6000013