Apart from being the AFL's best player, 'Dusty' is a marketer's dream for his authenticity and appeal off the park, writes Michael Warner

THE tatts, the trademark mohawk and football genius make Richmond superstar Dustin Martin the most marketable athlete in the country, experts say.

With a "vibe" likened to English football legend David Beckham (right), Dusty is quietly building a multimillion-dollar endorsements empire.

The triple-premiership Tiger has added Archies Footwear to a stable that boasts Bonds underwear, Jeep, Voost vitamins and watchmaker Kennedy Luxury.

Martin, 29, will release his own fitness app and a second book next season, and is closing in on a lucrative new boot and runners contract.

A documentary tracking the rise of the kid from Castlemaine in country Victoria to the top of Australian sport is also due in 2024.

The three-time Norm Smith medallist comes in at No.6 in News Corp's ranking of Australia's 100 most powerful and influential sports industry figures.

UK-based Supernova Entertainment boss Richard Beck, who has worked with Guns N' Roses, INXS and Bruce Springsteen, said Martin was also on the radar of some international advertising agencies.

"Dustin is a super interesting case study of a big fish in a little pond that rightly on merit, deserves to swim in the wider ocean," Beck said.

"I've followed not just his footy career, but the way his management team have brought showbiz acumen and sensibilities to his business and brand.

"He is unique enough of a talent and character to become whatever he wants and attain success previously unheard of.

"Healthy food, lifestyle accessories, cars, tech, sports products, you name it. They are all about to open up to him. He's that marketable." Martin's agent Ralph Carr said he believed his client was "not only one of the best players that has ever played the game, he is probably the most bankable sports brand in Australia".

"Our research shows he has one of the most recognisable faces in the country and he is strong in all states, which is extraordinary," Carr said. "I always thought with the right support and guidance he would become Australia's Michael Jordan or David Beckham.

"Brands need athletes just as much as athletes need brands. When they're paired together by the magic of sports endorsement deals, both can make big money.

"Many people get inspired by athletes and end up doing great things on their own, and inspiration is not something which can be priced." Emily Small, general manager of brands at Hanes Brands Australasia (owner of Bonds), said the company's partnership is "not just with Dustin the athlete, more the original and unique man he is off the field".

"Dustin likes to collaborate and is always fully engaged whether it be a trick shot, photo shoots (right) or running through Melbourne's streets in his undies," Small said.

Martin, who also has investments in property, is contracted to Richmond until the end of 2024 on a deal worth about $1.3 million a season.

Melbourne marketing expert John Tripodi, of Twenty3 Sport & Entertainment, said "there are a few dynamics at play which allow the likes of Dustin Martin to rise above the clutter".

"First, it helps when you're arguably the best player in the competition," Tripodi said. "The AFL is dominated by private school-educated footballers and Dusty represents a different narrative. He has his own backstory which provides some colour at times, but also gives him an authenticity which resonates with fans and sponsoring brands. Some may call this an 'X-factor'."

Dusty Inc.

Dustin Martin's endorsements: ■ Bonds ■ Jeep ■ Voost ■ Kennedy Luxury ■ Archies Footwear

In the works: ■ Documentary (due 2024) ■ Fitness app (2021) ■ Boot and runners deal ■ Book II (2021)

10 James Warburton Age: 50 Seven West Media chief executive Source of power: The man in charge of the free-to-air broadcast rights for AFL and international cricket flexed his muscle over winter by negotiating heavily reduced deals with both codes. While an overwhelming majority of AFL fans say they want a traditional 2.30pm Grand Final - after this year's COVID-enforced experiment at the Gabba - Warburton and co will have the biggest say on whether the thirst for ratings wins out and the AFL permanently shifts to a twilight or night-time decider. The network has publicly savaged Cricket Australia over its Test, one-day and Big Bash scheduling and the success of this summer could have dramatic ramifications on the future of Australia's national sport. The early departure of Indian superstar Virat Kohli won't help. WARNER

9 Wayne Bennett Age: 70 NRL coach Source of power: Written off as a past-his-prime geriatric after a COVID-19 breach where he claimed to have been confused by the NRL's quarantine rules, Bennett confirmed himself as a coaching genius when he masterminded the biggest shock in State of Origin history. Queensland's giant-killing 2020 series win over NSW is the latest triumph in a career that has produced seven premiership crowns with two separate clubs. The 70-year-old has huge influence across rugby league, with his advice sought for major decisions in the game. PHELPS

8 Patrick Delany Foxtel chief executive Source of power: During a seven-year stint as boss of Fox Sports, which ended in 2018 when he became CEO of the Foxtel Group, Delany was the driving force behind the reshaping of Australia's sports broadcast landscape, a key figure behind every major sports deal over the past 10 years. He oversaw the introduction of Fox Footy and Fox League and helped create the Big Bash League in partnership with Cricket Australia in 2011. Delany changed the look of Fox Sports, endorsed magazine shows that humanised and broadened interest in codes, and helped to bring almost every major sport in Australia to Fox despite plenty of spirited rights negotiations that were never as routine as they sounded. A lively public speaker, he encouraged his commentators to have a crack, once saying at a season launch: "If I am going to put a microphone in front of you, I want you to say something." More recently he was the key architect of the Kayo streaming service, a digital disruption of Foxtel that now has huge popular traction with a new generation of sports fans that never had Foxtel. CRADDOCK

7 Michael Miller Age: 51 News Corp Australia executive chairman Source of power: Raised in the Hunter Valley, Miller's first love of media started as a boy reading sports results in The Muswellbrook Chronicle. Decades later he is the man with a big say in Australia over News Corp's digital, publishing and broadcast sporting empire. His influence stretches to all corners of the sporting spectrum - from being a shadow across the negotiating table when Fox Sports won the cricket rights in 2018, to one-on-one discussions with Wayne Bennett in his tumultuous final days as Broncos coach, to reassuring country readers that a switch from paper to digital publication would enhance rather than tarnish their local sport coverage. Renowned for his measured demeanour, Miller's role at News Corp is much broader than sport but sport remains a key part of it and no major decision is made without passing his desk. He has sat on boards ranging from realestate.com.au to Waratahs Rugby.

CRADDOCK

6 Dustin Martin Age: 29 Richmond AFL star Source of power: The biggest name in Australian domestic sport and the closest thing we've had to English soccer legend David Beckham, minus the pop star wife. Kids want to play like him, grown drunk men adopt his haircut, sponsors clamour to sign him and every rival club wishes he wore their jumper. Not many footballers of any code get to sip cocktails in the Maldives with Serena Williams or to leave their car in the MCG basement carpark for weeks after yet another premiership salute. Three flags and three Norm Smith Medals stamp him as arguably the greatest AFL finals player in history and at 29 there's plenty of top-end footy left in Dusty. Turns heads in the NRL states and helped Richmond break a 37-year run of misery to become the biggest sporting club in the land with more than 100,000 members. WARNER

5 Sam Kerr Age: 27 Australian women's soccer captain With admirers stretching from Serena Williams down to young fans - including boys - seen wearing her jersey, the Matildas captain's rise has embodied the spectacular surge of women's sport in Australia. With her incredible skillset and multicultural background, she represents many parts of Australia and has taken women's soccer to a level of popularity that was unthinkable even a decade ago. Her backflip goalscoring celebrations have both showcased her star quality and freakish athleticism which last year saw her voted one of the best female soccer players in the world. She has just signed a deal to do six children's books claiming she wanted to inspire Australian kids to chase their dreams. CRADDOCK

4 Gillon McLachlan Age: 47 AFL chief executive Source of power: Polo playing, racehorse-owning boss of Australia's biggest domestic sport - the code that draws the largest crowds and pockets the richest broadcast deals. Navigated the game through the COVID crisis, a task made harder by the emergency exodus of 10 teams from the Victorian heartland and the added complication of negotiating border control rules with six different states. As the biggest code with the most to lose, McLachlan oversaw the league's response to the financial crisis, reducing what loomed as a potential $1b hit into an estimated $100m loss, notwithstanding savage cost and job cuts. Struck a deal with the Queensland government on the eve of a state election that saved the season. The arrival of Peter V'landys has been a game changer in the code wars and his rugby league counterpart read the play better, boldly restarting his competition two weeks earlier and locking away an extended pay-TV deal with Foxtel. Entering his seventh season in the hot seat, McLachlan's remains the most visible figure in Australian rules.

WARNER

3 Tim Paine Age: 35 Australian Test cricket captain Source of power: The most unexpected saviour in Australian sporting history. Became Australian captain midway through the ball-tampering Test in Cape Town and his sturdy temperament guided his ship through this nation's greatest cricket controversy. When Australian cricket was wobbling on its moral axis two summers ago in a losing series against India he was the lone cool head among team bosses. His rousing yet composed dressing-room speech to an Australian team that lost a Test due to a Ben Stokes 'miracle' at Headingley last year was one of the finest by an Australian captain and his team duly rebounded to retain the Ashes. Australia owes him much. Selectors had traditionally thought keepers should not be made captains due to their high work level but they had little choice when appointing Paine and he has handled the two roles exceptionally well. CRADDOCK

2 John Coates Age: 70 Australian Olympic Committee president and International Olympic Committee vice-president Source of power: No Australian wields as much influence on global sport as Coates. As the second-highest ranking official in the Olympic movement, Coates has the power to persuade sport's most powerful executives and captains of industry, as well as major political leaders and even members of royal families. A lawyer by profession, Coates is also the president of the Court of Arbitration for Sport and has a knack for getting his wishes. It was Coates who made the inspired decision to pick Cathy Freeman to light the cauldron at the 2000 Sydney Olympics. He's a mover and shaker on a stack of high-powered committees, including the bid team to bring the Rugby World Cup back to Australia in 2027. But his biggest goal right now is to ensure Brisbane wins the hosting rights for the 2032 Olympics and Paralympics. If the world's biggest multi-sports event comes back, you can bet it'll all be down to the power of Coates. LINDEN

TOP 100 FULL LIST Part I: 100-21 (published yesterday) 100 Andrew Bogut 99Dave Rennie 98Annastacia Palaszczuk 97 Matt Rose 96Nick Hockley 95 Peter Gordon 94Cathy Freeman 93Josephine Sukkar 92Larry Kestelman 91Kitty Chiller 90Peggy O'Neal 89Steve Gillis 88James Cummings 87Marne Fechner 86Liz Cambage 85Daniel Ricciardo 84Jamie Kah 83Sam Ayoub 82Paul Marsh 81Tony Cochrane 80Arthur Laundy 79Michael Hooper 78Paul Connors 77Mack Horton 76Andrew Pridham 75Ricky Stuart 74Trevor Hohns 73Jamie Whincup 72Russell Crowe 71Dylan Alcott 70 Adam Goodes 69Adam Scott 68Craig Kelly 67Patty Mills 66 Cate Campbell 65 Craig Bellamy 64Tim Tszyu 63Chris Waller 62Dave Trodden 61 Mark Skaife 60Brad Fittler 59Megan Davis 58Ben Simmons 57Pat Cummins 56Greg Alexander 55 Trevor Nisbett 54Clint Newton 53Amanda Elliott 52Matthew Tripp 51James Johnson 50 Lynne Anderson 49David Sharpe 48 Buddy Franklin 47Wayne Pearce 46Lloyd Williams 45Jeff Kennett 44 Ryan Story 43Jane Fernandez 42Steve Hocking 41Mal Meninga 40Curtis McGrath 39Rob Clarke 38Matt Carroll 37 Steve Crawley 36Alastair Clarkson 35Shane Warne 34 Phil Gould 33 Eddie McGuire 32Cameron Smith 31Ricky Ponting 30Nick Politis 29Tayla Harris 28 Roland Dane 27 Hamish McLennan 26Latrell Mitchell 25 Richard Goyder 24Ellyse Perry 23 Kerry Stokes 22Steve Smith 21John Messara