FOR the first time in a long time, State of Origin could become a full-blown audition for Kangaroos selection with Australia coach Mal Meninga pushing for a one-off Test match to be played at the end of this year.

To be played in the last week of November or first week of December, Meninga has spent the past week -canvassing the opinions of senior players who have backed his plan to finish 2020 with a Test match.

As a result of the re-modelled season which was altered after the COVID-19 shut-down, this year's State of Origin series will be played on November 4, 11 and 18 as opposed to during the middle of the season.

Traditionally, the Kangaroos have played a Test match before the mid-year State of Origin series.

But Meninga wants a Test match to be played after this Origin series - which would transform the state against state match into a genuine contest for Kangaroos -selection.

Meninga has spoken to Kangaroos captain Boyd -Cordner and Test stars Daly Cherry-Evans and Wade Graham this week to measure their interest in trying to organise a season-ending Test match, most likely against New Zealand.

The trio told Meninga they would be privileged to pull on the green and gold following a year like never before.

"I've been asking for their feedback on what they're -feeling based on what has been an extraordinary year," -Meninga said.

"On the back of a season and Origin as well, what would their appetite be on playing one more game at the end of the year?

"I feel it would be a very good way to finish off an -extraordinary year with an international game.

"I was very pleased to hear how eager they would be to play. "But the other thing that struck me with them was that the last time we played -together, we lost to Tonga, so the players are very focused on raising the level of -the Kangaroos jersey." Meninga agreed that the Test match would only place further impetus on the performance of players during the Origin series.

"When we look at picking our team, we've obviously put some criteria around values and behaviour," Meninga said.

"In no particular order, there's also loyalty, there's club form, there's the final series and there's Origin - they're the four criteria we look at. "But with Origin being at the end of the year, if we were to play a Test match after, our criteria is in order now which acknowledges that reward for effort and success through the year."