NSW Rugby League boss Dave Trodden has welcomed the chance to host an entire State of Origin campaign in Sydney this year, saying: "We won't have the same issues as Queensland."

Only 24 hours after the Queensland Government turned its back on this year's interstate series, planning is already under way for Western Sydney to play host.

The move comes after Deputy Premier John Barilaro met on Tuesday morning with ARLC chairman Peter V'landys, NRL CEO Todd Greenberg and Project Apollo head Wayne Pearce.

Speaking afterwards, Barilaro said he would be "cheering" for the Harbour City to make history in hosting all three games, especially with Blues coach Brad Fittler looking to earn a series three-peat.

Earlier this week, Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk -effectively put Origin up for tender when she sensationally ruled Brisbane out of hosting games during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Enter the NSWRL, which will have the heavyweight backing of Barilaro inside government.

"Origin is definitely on this year," Trodden said. "And if the Queenslanders don't want to play any games up there - or can't - we're more than happy to host the entire series.

"The pleasing thing for us is that we won't have the same issues as Queensland. "There seems to be a far greater willingness (from government) for Origin to happen in Sydney than has been expressed up there." Under one proposal, Maroons coach Kevin Walters and his players would be based in Penrith for all three Origin camps, accommodated at the Mercure hotel while training out of Panthers Academy.

Elsewhere, and in the case of an Origin lockout, Bankwest Stadium is already firming to play host.

The Blues also have a strong supporter in Barilaro, who is advocating on behalf of the NRL with various state government officials, including Premier Gladys Berejiklian.

Quizzed on playing an entire Origin series in Sydney, the lifelong Manly fan said: "If we follow health advice and the NRL has proper protocols in place, I'd be cheering for NSW to host all three Origin games." Apart from ruling Queensland out as an Origin host this week, Premier Palaszczuk expressed concern at her state's three NRL sides - Brisbane, Gold Coast and North Queensland - potentially shifting south to play out of an NRL bubble.

"Which surprised me," Trodden said. "Because everyone in rugby league is really conscious of the public health issues.

"Nobody wants to be blase about it, and I don't think we are. When we talk about wanting to play footy again, it's implicit in that desire that we only want to play in circumstances where it is safe to do so. Nobody wants to put anyone at risk.

"And if you take that as the working assumption - that we are going to play in safe circumstances - it surprises me that people would put obstacles in the way rather than trying to make it happen." The NSWRL has offered up its $30 million Centre of Excellence to interstate teams, which could live and train out of an Olympic Park "bubble" in coming months. As for the Queensland Origin side?

"I don't think they'd want to use it," Trodden said. "There are plenty of other alternatives, some of which have already been canvassed, including the use of Panthers Academy.

"I'm sure the Queenslanders would be far more comfortable in something that is exclusively their own. Which is why the Penrith option would likely appeal to them." Bankwest Stadium is also the early favourite to host should the Origin series be played without fans."Although, priority No.1 is when we play the three games," Trodden said.