Bat-tle for our sense of humour May I suggest that those who complained about the Boating Camping Fishing ad depicting someone eating a bat sandwich grow a funny bone and stop shoving your unfunny ideals down the throat of the majority of the population, who still have a sense of humour (Sanga scene driving 'em batty, 4/1).

Glenn O'Sullivan, Kanwal "" " Honestly, since when did Australians lose their sense of humour? Why are people complaining about the Boating Camping Fishing ads (Sanga scene driving 'em batty, 4/1)?

They are one of the most amusing ads around, and much better than those awful and repetitive ads for life insurance, funerals and instant finance.

Margaret Wright, Pendle Hill, "" " An advertisement for the Boating, Camping and Fishing stores is attracting complaints from people upset over an ad that shows someone eating a bat sandwich, which is a sly reference to COVID's supposed origins.

The Advertising Standards Bureau is taking the complaints seriously and has launched an investigation.

I am always up for a bit of larrikin humour, it's the Australian way, but after viewing the ad, it left a very bad taste in my mouth.

Peter Penglis, Kambah, ACT

Maintain pressure on China over their virus It's pleasing to read there is at least one influential person not letting up on China's responsibility for the coronavirus (American official revives lab theory; 4/1).

I was beginning to think world leaders had conveniently swept this matter under the politically correct carpet for fear of antagonising China.

In fact I'm still not sure if that's not the case, given the WHO investigation is looking more and more by the day to be a non-event/ whitewash.

There is no denying this catastrophic event originated in China. Whether it was man-made might be open to conjecture but there is no doubt China has to be held accountable, regardless of the precise circumstances. Why then are world leaders so quiet … scared, perhaps?

At least Prime Minister Scott Morrison has had the intestinal fortitude to insist on an investigation.

The problem is it will be a Clayton's model. This isn't good enough; we must not lay down on this.

John George, Terrigal

Our heroes saving Fiji A great story in The Daily Telegraph about the Australian government and the ADF helping out Fiji after it was battered by a cyclone that saw the place flattened (Australia delivers aid to neighbour in need, 4/1).

The ADF is helping with the rebuilding of schools, supplying water and replenishing food.

What a great country we are - always ready to step in when needed. Barry, Hallidays Point

Many unhappy returns Various state premiers are closing their borders in an effort to protect their citizens from COVID-19 (Border closures see Victorians locked out, 4/1).

Might I respectfully suggest that the commonwealth does the same and closes our international borders to protect Australians from this very contagious disease.

Most of the people returning to Australia now would probably have resided overseas for a number of years, and are using the dual passport system to gain entry to a relatively stable virus environment.

We have done the hard yards over 12 months now to try and combat this disease and to be placed in peril because of the returning "expats" doesn't sit well with a lot of people.

Janice Russell, Malua Bay

Voice of '60s crosses over A voice from one of Liverpool's (England) greatest has fallen, Gerry Marsden (Singer Gerry Marsden dies aged 78 - Online, 4/1).

Gerry's style of writing and singing was heartfelt, melodic but catchy, with a voice that was, somehow, never going to be anything other than true to its roots.

With his band the Pacemakers he helped make the '60s so memorable, and gave us songs that will be eternal, I am sure.

Never a boastful or a brash person just an all-round great guy. As a singer myself for all of those years, I was indeed privileged to have sung and recorded some of his songs with Don't Let The Sun Catch You Crying being a favourite.

Gerry Marsden, we salute you, and Liverpool will miss a true and loved son. Dave Burt, Kingswood

Keeping the arts in tune I am looking forward to attending my first opera production at the Sydney Opera House this month.

While many I know have seen performances by overseas artists and children's shows with grandchildren, now is the time we all should support our Australian performers in the arts.

Hard to believe that the early version of The Merry Widow was initially unsuccessful (Merry Widow's magic was inspired by a flop, History, 4/1).

La Traviata (outdoors) is my Christmas gift to myself and this time not in the "cheap" seats (COVID restrictions permitted).

Gloria Velleley, Belrose

Fuel for thought There is an old saying a picture paints a thousand words. Monday's picture of the gas-guzzling, carbon dioxide-producing Land Cruiser definitely gave Jane Caro the stranded feeling (Gas-guzzler lands climate crusader in muddy spot, 4/1).

Ms Caro, should remember the words, do as I say.

Her comments that they needed such a vehicle to get to her farm makes me think "pigs might fly".

A vehicle such as a Suzuki Jimny, a small, fuel-sipping four-wheel-drive could easily get there and probably not get stuck.

It's amazing noisy advocates for climate change don't practise what they preach. Joe Kovac, Prestons

Masking of retail issue Regardless of your opinion on the mandatory wearing of masks, it seemed very odd to me that the Premier suggested masks would lead to an increase in economic activity, when clearly this will not be the case ($200 mask fines, 3/1).

My local shopping centre on Monday morning was as quiet as a Sunday. Odder still is that I must wear a mask when quickly dashing in to get my morning coffee yet can stand around for hours with nearly 100 strangers in a pub or club, in a much more confined area, without a mask.

Restrictions must be logical and consistent if you want support from the community. I had previously thought NSW had the right balance. Now I'm a lot less sure.

Mitchell Beston, Woy Woy

Briefly … Thanks Tim Blair for your very funny piece in Monday's Tele (The year that will be - Opinion, 4/1). I haven't laughed so much for a long time. Please keep up your humour. We Coasties need all the laughter we can get at the moment.

Bob Fitzpatrick, Bateau Bay "" " Surely to goodness we should not have to put up with any waffle from Greta Thunberg this early in the year (Greenie celebs can globe trot: Greta, 4/7). This poor girl should be pitied for her ignorance.

Erwin Vitnell, Bathurst

"" " While smartphones give ready connections to photos, videos, online chat etc it is obvious that they are never smart or adequate enough to replace the real physical need to connect with family or friends (New rise of phone phobia, 4/1) Steve Ngeow, Chatswood "" " Way to go Mikey Wright, what a legend with that launch into the surf in Hawaii to rescue a stricken swimmer, truly epic (The Wright stuff, 2/1). Try that with a man-bun, hipsters. Only mullet power can claim that type of gnarly action.

Robert Brown, Davistown

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001