China's lethally evasive communist government and its craven official enablers stand exposed by the coronavirus, and need some serious doses of legal justice

What did China know about the likelihood of unleashing a deadly coronavirus pandemic upon the world, and when did China know it?

Answers: a hell of a lot, and a hell of a long time ago.

The first intensely pathogenic human coronavirus, SARS, killed nearly 800 people between 2002 and 2004. A second outbreak, of the terrifyingly named severe acute diarrhoea syndrome coronavirus, or SADS, occurred in 2018 and wiped out 24,000 pigs.

"Both outbreaks began in China," experts from the Wuhan Institute of Virology and the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences concluded, "and were caused by coronaviruses of bat origin." The same experts also warned in March 2019: "It is generally believed that bat-borne CoVs will re-emerge to cause the next disease outbreak. In this regard, China is a likely hotspot.

"The challenge is to predict when and where, so that we can try our best to prevent such outbreaks." Stopping the sale of bats for human consumption might have been a good start. Instead, China's communist leaders did nothing.

Worse still, they sought to conceal the latest coronavirus outbreak. According to some reports, the first coronavirus case emerged on November 17 in Hubei province. Six days after the first Wuhan resident fell ill on December 10, local health officials made the connection between the disease and - surprise! - a bat-selling market in their city.

According to a timeline compiled by US news site Axios, authorities were not told about the new virus until December 27. Despite that alert, government officials still took little or no action - apart from reprimanding doctors who discussed the virus in an online chat room.

Oh, Wuhan also threw a big Lunar New Year banquet on January 18. You know, to give the coronavirus a chance to become acquainted with tens of thousands of people.

The evidence is in. China wilfully mishandled this matter prior to and during the current outbreak. To date, Chinese government inaction has led to the deaths of more than 11,000.

So, what happens next? Well, some may say that arresting Chinese President Xi Jinping and hauling him before a court in his jocks is unrealistically ambitious.

This is not the case. Arresting every single member of the Chinese Communist Party and charging them for decades of tyrannical barbarism - now, that's ambitious.

(In such a scenario, of course, sentence discounts would be permitted for those Chinese officials who so upset ex-PM Kevin Rudd during Copenhagen climate talks in 2010.) Encouragingly, there may be a means of bringing Jinping and other senior communists to justice.

"An argument could be made that just like support for terrorism, which is legally actionable, a government that engages in such reckless disregard and negligence and covers up an epidemic that has the potential to spread worldwide could be held legally liable," Israel-based lawyer Nitsana Darshan-Leitner told Fox News.

"Cover-ups and deliberate acts to conceal a deadly medical crisis are not (among) the protected acts of a sovereign state or of responsible leaders." Speaking of cover-ups, the UN's China-compliant World Health Organisation and its useless leader Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus deserve more than mere media criticism.

"The coronavirus pandemic has shown that Tedros is not fit to lead the WHO," academic Bradley Thayer and Lianchao Han, vice-president of Citizen Power Initiatives for China, wrote in a joint opinion piece.

"Because of his leadership, the world may have missed a critical window to halt the pandemic or mitigate its virulence." As China actively concealed the extent of the outbreak and silenced whistleblowers, Tedros praised Chinese "transparency". On January 14, the WHO repeated China's wild claim that the coronavirus was not contagious between humans.

And Tedros is still cheerleading for China all these weeks later. "For the first time, China has reported no domestic COVID19 cases yesterday," Tedros tweeted on Friday. "This is an amazing achievement, which gives us all reassurance that the coronavirus can be beaten." Anyone who believes anything from the Chinese government - about the coronavirus, climate change, last night's football results or the colour of the sky - is an idiot.

Tedros is an idiot whose China-abetting organisation happens to be substantially funded by Australia, among other nations. We may save some economy-rebuilding cash by ending that arrangement.

China does have other friends. Last week members of the reflexively anti-US media rounded on President Donald Trump after he referred to the "China virus".

"Why do you keep using this?" one reporter asked during a White House briefing last week. "A lot of people say it's racist." "Because it's from China," Trump calmly replied, pointing out later that China had at one point tried to pin responsibility for the origins of the virus on American soldiers.

"That can't happen. It's not gonna happen. Not as long as I'm president," Trump said. "It comes from China."As did the previous coronavirus outbreaks. As, most likely, will future coronavirus outbreaks.