THE NRL has finally put a figure on the financial damage caused by COVID-19. In talks with club bosses this week, it is understood NRL chief executive Andrew Abdo told them the game was budgeting for losses of up to $250"million this season.

Last year, the game generated more than $552 million in revenue, although that figure included $24 million in contra from the broadcasters.

That target has been downgraded this season to as little as $280 million, although the hope is that with the help of the broadcasters they can push the figure north of $300 million.

Regardless, the losses are devastating as the strain on the game is exacerbated by the $13 million in additional costs that have been dedicated towards bringing rugby league back on schedule. Those costs include the fees incurred in the hiring of biosecurity experts, charter flights and housing of the Warriors.

While players have been guaranteed 80 per cent of their contract figures, clubs have been told they will receive their $1.1 million grant for the remaining five months of this season.

They have agitated for more, although it is understood that at their meeting on Tuesday night they were told the NRL would absorb some of the costs that would normally go their way.

Like every sport around the globe, the NRL has budgeted to suffer devastating losses over the course of this year due to the absence of gate receipts and corporate support while fans are locked out of venues.

The NRL's financial reports for last season indicated that non-broadcast revenue increased by 25 per cent to $203.9 million in 2019.

"The largest contributor to the uplift being major events ($16.6 million) as a result of the new Magic Round and an improved (State of) Origin series and premiership grand final," the report said. "Corporate partnership revenues also increased." Magic Round has been put on ice due to the outbreak of COVID-19. At the same time, the NRL is expected to miss out on the money that would have come from playing an Origin game in Adelaide. The NRL will also lose significant money if the grand final is played without crowds.Broadcast revenue, or at least the size of it, also remains in doubt due to ongoing talks with the Nine Network and Foxtel. It is understood club officials were given little clarity over the progress of broadcast negotiations.