'Those who have caused problems should be the ones to solve problems," China's Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao -Lijian told Australian reporters last week.

Very well, then. We'll let China get on with solving the coronavirus. Or we would, if the Chinese dictatorship showed any inclination to do so. As matters stand, China's communists won't even agree to an investigation of the virus's origins.

Asking for information on the Wuhan flu only enrages them.

"China is angry. If you make China the enemy, China will be the enemy," a Chinese government official told a Nine reporter last week.

That outburst followed the deliberate leaking of a Chinese government document that listed 14 specific grievances with Australia.

They include "spearheading a crusade" over China's intrusions into Taiwan and Hong Kong, banning Huawei spyware from the 5G network, blocking Chinese investment in crucial areas of Australian infrastructure and agriculture and, of course, calling for an independent investigation into the origins of COVID-19.

Everything would be tickety-boo if Australia complied with these directives. As Nine political editor Chris Uhlmann summarised: "All can be repaired if we are willing to muzzle our media, shut down our think tanks, sell off strategic assets and shut up about the origins of COVID-19. Simple." Not too much to ask, really. Maybe we could get Kevin Rudd, that petition bloke, to act as a go-between.

"Our two countries have different political systems," Rudd once told a Chinese interviewer. "We also have slight differences in our political values." Only slight differences, mind.

On the one hand, we have voting, which is how we dumped Rudd in 2013. On the other, China has Xi Jinping, whether they want him or not.

Another slight difference is Australia not forcing ethnic minorities to work in slave labour camps. Also, we don't send bills for bullets to the families of executed dissidents, mainly because we don't execute them in the first place.

You know, maybe Rudd isn't really our go-to guy on this. He lacks nuance. Perhaps the ABC's Stan Grant could assist. On Saturday, Grant invited his readers to "imagine for a moment the view from Beijing".

Or from Ultimo. Same deal, really.

"The Chinese Communist Party has overseen an economic miracle. In three decades it has taken a country that once could not feed itself and turned it into an economic powerhouse," Grant wrote.

Capitalism, even in state-controlled form, always creates wealth. This is not a miracle.

"China's rise has been peaceful. It has joined in a global rules based order: a member of the World Trade Organisation, the World Health Organisation, a permanent five member of the UN's Security Council." He means peaceful tyranny by unaccountable international forces. "It is a signatory to global compacts like the Paris Climate Accords and engages in peacekeeping and -humanitarian operations." How's the peace going in Hong Kong lately? Also from Grant, Beijing's all-seeing interpreter: "When Australia calls for an inquiry into the origins of coronavirus without first liaising with China, why wouldn't Beijing be annoyed?" Better questions: why doesn't peaceful, humanitarian Beijing run an open inquiry, and why should Australia trust the findings of any bogus UN-associated "investigation"?