Fears China lab virus origin theory could be WMD 2.0

THERE are concerns at senior levels of the Australian government that the United States' position that COVID-19 most likely leaked from a Wuhan laboratory is akin to their claims Saddam Hussein had weapons of mass destruction.

The concerns centre around a lack of substantial evidence to support the line of inquiry, pushed most strongly by the US, that COVID-19 was inadvertently released from the Wuhan Institute of Virology.

The theory is being investigated by the Five Eyes Intelligence network of Australia, New Zealand, Canada, the US and the UK.

But in recent days it has been promoted as the most likely cause of the outbreak by US President Donald Trump and Secretary of State, Mike Pompeo, who said there was "significant evidence" to support it.

The Daily Telegraph understands the Five Eyes network, including its security and intelligence agencies in the US and Australia, is not aware of the nature of this "overwhelming evidence" that Mr Pompeo and Mr Trump claim.

The Daily Telegraph understands the government's central concern is that the US may be putting undue emphasis on the theory the virus originated in a Wuhan laboratory and could be making the same mistake that George Bush and Tony Blair made when they pressured the UN weapons inspector to declare that Saddam Hussein possessed weapons of mass destruction, which was the validation for a second allied attack on Iraq.

In recent days Mr Trump said he has seen evidence that he was not allowed to share which supported the theory the coronavirus was an accidental leak from a level 4 bio-containment facility in Wuhan, where there have been concerns about safety practices.

It is understood that Australia has seen all of the evidence the US possesses under the intelligence sharing arrangement, and there is nothing to strongly or even reasonably suggest the naturally-occurring virus came out of the laboratory rather than the wet market.

It comes as sources told The Daily Telegraph the schism between the US executives' position on China's culpability for the outbreak and the intelligence agencies has put Scott Morrison in an awkward position.

The PM is trying to build support for a transparent and independent inquiry into the origins and the handling of the outbreak.

Mr Morrison is taking a more nuanced approach that avoids direct accusations against China as he seeks to build consensus for an inquiry at the World Health Assembly in Geneva next month.

Mr Morrison wrote to the G20 nations on Monday, pitching a review into the pandemic response.

"What's really important is that we have a proper review, an independent review, which looks into the sources of these things in a transparent way so we can learn the lessons," he said.

It is understood Mr Morrison does not want to publicly undermine comments made by either Mr Trump or Mr Pompeo.The issue has come to the fore after The Daily Telegraph revealed a dossier compiled by concerned western governments that lays out the case of negligence against China over its cover-up of the outbreak. The document does not overly focus on whether the virus originated from a laboratory, instead it centres on China's abject failings in its handing of the outbreak.