PM: Sovereignty not for sale AUSTRALIA is open to meeting with Beijing officials to repair the relationship with China, but will not make "pre-emptive concessions," Prime Minister Scott Morrison says.

Mr Morrison said Australia valued its partnership with China, but would not be "conceding the points" it had "set out" on issues including foreign investment and human rights.

"We will of course remain absolutely open and available to meet, to discuss any of the issues that have been identified," he said.

"But those discussions, as I've made clear, won't take place on the base of any sort of pre-emptive concessions on Australia's part on those matters." Beijing officials have previously published a list of 14 grievances with Australia, insisting they be addressed in order for the damaged relationship to be repaired.

Australia's decision to block Huawei from its 5G contract, its calls for an investigation into the origins of COVID-19, the cancellation of some academic visas and criticism of tough new security laws in Hong Kong are among the Chinese Government's concerns.

Mr Morrison said Australia's position on those issues was "honest" and "transparent".

"But, of course, we value the trading and more broader comprehensive relationship, and we will be taking up whatever opportunities we believe is going to best position Australia to be in a position to advance that relationship," he said.

"It's an important relationship, but it is a relationship that will be pursued on the basis of Australia's national interests, and without, in any way, compromising Australia's sovereignty," he said.

Labor leader Anthony Albanese said on Monday he had written to Mr Morrison to suggest he engage with the expertise of former prime ministers amid increasing concern about jobs among the business community and union movement.

"It is China that is to blame for breaking down that relationship," he said. "But you need to find a way through, and I think that it is very sensible to engage former prime ministers Kevin Rudd and John Howard."