At first glance Antifa may look like a bunch of pimple-faced anarchists, but their aims are far more sinister

On the face of it, Antifa may appear to be a bunch of pimply activists. Yet just because they don't look like -Islamist terrorists or a hostile -uniformed army does not mean they are any less of a threat to democracy.

Because ultimately, they are globalised, networked, decentralised and violent. Antifa are terrorists whose modus operandi is to infect peaceful protests in order to instigate the use of force by police. The risk is a popular backlash against the government. And they present our geopolitical adversaries such as China and Russia with opportunities to destabilise our system from within.

In a world full of snakes Antifa are no less of a threat to Australia than anyone else, due to their tactic of "people's war".

In a people's war, an insurgent force is organised into small units, dependent on support from within the local population. This is built through infiltrating layers of a government, community and civil society, now hyper-connected and instantly mobilised by -social media.

This idea of the people's war developed by North Vietnamese military leader Nguygen Giap, followed Mao Zedong's thesis On Guerrilla Warfare. Argentinian Marxist revolutionary, Che Guevara (1928 - 1967) was also a fan.

Spontaneous general uprisings are one of their most effective tools, especially where weak-kneed elected representatives surround the executive branch of government.

The laws of separation suggest the seven and a half thousand Australian Antifa Facebook supporters have potential to create our own nightmare. Easy to initiate, low cost to -resource, and self-escalating where anyone can join.

The grain-fed, Nike sneaker-wearing, iPhone-carrying Antifa of today is not a new phenomenon.

When confronted with the Anarchists, the 1900s terrorist phenomenon of his time, US President Theodore Roosevelt said: "The anarchist is the enemy of humanity, the enemy of all mankind and is a deeper degree of criminality than any other." It was one of the most successful terrorist movements of the time.

One of Karl Marx's rivals, Russian revolutionary Mikhail Bakunin (1814 - 76), declared: "We recognise no other activity but the work of extermination. We admit the forms in which the activity will show itself will be extremely varied - poison, the knife, the rope etc … In this struggle, revolution sanctifies everything alike." From 1892 to 1894 Paris was subjected to eleven bombings.

In 1920, 38 people were killed and hundreds wounded in New York when a horse-drawn cart filled with explosives was detonated on Wall Street.

Even Australia felt the impact of anarchist terrorism. On 28 May 1898 a bomb exploded outside Daniel Maloney's house in the Melbourne suburb of Fitzroy.

It caused a sensation at the time. By 1914 anarchists had attacked sixteen nations. More recent examples are the Italian Red Brigade and the West German Red Army Faction. All could be defined as homegrown -terrorists.

We are living in one of the most precarious times since the Cold War. The West is severely weakened by measures to defeat COVID-19. Powerful geopolitical forces are at play and the stakes are high.

An attack on our system does not need to come via tanks and battleships. Far better to support your enemy's internal enemies and undermine legitimacy from within.

That is why we need to maintain a Sauron's eye for efforts by states to use Antifa as a destabilising proxy force.

If you think all this sounds far-fetched consider how swiftly life can change and events can converge.

The collapse of the Berlin Wall, the Arab Spring, coups in Fiji, riots in the Solomons, Ukraine and now Hong Kong, are good examples.

Some of the most dangerous terrorist and revolutionary organisations such as al Qaeda started as small groups no one took seriously.

On June 8, in the US city of Seattle, Antifa-led insurgents took control of the Capital Hill Precinct (ironically policing barricades with M-4 armed guards). Going in heavy risks making the US look no better than China.

Unlike states or non-state actors with a classic command and control structure, these postmodern anarchists are hard for law enforcement to disrupt.

Use force, you are accused of stepping on their civil rights. Don't use force and innocent people and their property are bashed, looted and set on fire.

Then there is the question of who do you attack?

Effectively, the movement has adopted the TE Lawrence approach of being an idea or a thing, invulnerable, without front or back with a high degree of fluidity of action.

One of Antifa's clever tactics has been to infect peaceful protests such as those in the US and the climate protests in Australia.

Consider how our immune system works.

If Antifa resembled a virus embedded within its host the aim is to create a hyper-immune response. In other words, your own immune system -becomes the killer.

Equally dire is the belief by corporations that the cure requires acquiescing to their demands. Best to deal with them at their origin than at their growth stage.

Our opponents (all non-Western) and non-state actors such as Islamist extremists and now these pimply faced anarchists are flexible and agile.

For example, support by the new-age feminists and social activist movements of nonviolent Islamic extremism and its treatment of women might seem peculiar.

Other examples are the alliance between Hezbollah and Mexican drug cartels, Somali pirates and terrorists, or terrorists and people smugglers in North Africa. Those involved in human and drug trafficking, weapons smuggling and organised crime would happily form alliances with the likes of Antifa.

All thrive on chaos and hate the same system.

Even though they hate our democratic institutions describing Antifa as terrorists will not win many friends in mainstream media or academia.

Yet, threats to Australia will be increasingly dominated by the synthesis of technology, extremism and financing, all employed to advance the strategic interests of our opponents both foreign and domestic.

Recent weeks have shown how internal dissent is never far below the surface and could become one of our most significant political risks. Dr. Jason Thomas is director, Frontier Assessments