FOOTY is back!

So too is the KFC SuperCoach - and haven't we got some storylines and team selections to sift through for our all important cheapies.

Because aside from the pre-round one Cheapie Bible, the trades you make this week could well be the most important you make all season.

Cheapies are the single most important key to SuperCoach success. Without them, you can't afford the Cooks, Taumalolos and Tedescos of the world, and picking the wrong cheapies can ruin your entire season.

A cheapie, by definition, is any player under $280,000. As the season goes along we will give a running verdict on when to sell, sit, buy or hold every cheapie who hits our radar.

Here we go!

Jarome Luai Panthers HFB|5/8 ($257,400) Avg: 46PPG. Rd 2: 35 points Many doubted Luai, but he is one of the best in the sub-$300k price bracket in any position, and the No.6 jersey is his. Luai could even take over the goalkicking in the absence of Nathan Cleary in the next few weeks. And his running game is where the points will come. Hopefully things land right for him, and we see Luai jet in price to the $450k-$500k range in no time.

Verdict: BUY - The Panthers started on fire, and we can expect Luai to get better.

Toby Rudolf Sharks FRF ($171,900) Avg: 39.5PPG. Rd 2: 50 points Rudolf's first two games were very promising, particularly his second, when he kept Andrew Fifita and Jack Williams on the bench for large chunks of the game and scored 50 points in base stats in 42 minutes. With the forward rotation unaffected by injuries or suspensions, the spot is Rudolf's and hopefully the minutes (and role) continue to evolve.

Verdict: BUY - Rudolf is exciting. I had him atop the cheapie FRF trio (JTB, Musgrove, Rudolf) pecking order to start the season, and that is even stronger right now.

Jamayne Taunua-Brown Warriors FRF ($171,900) Avg: 41PPG. Rd 2: 46 points This kid is exciting. He has a high work rate and ball-playing skills of a halfback. In his first two games he returned 36 and 46 points respectively at a tick over 1.0PPM. And impressively - 39 minutes. The offloads, tackles busts and other attacking stats will come. We figured the Warriors would have Jazz Tevaga back but he's injured and Ah Mau is out, so JTB starts at prop. Hallelujah.

Verdict: BUY - I'm a huge fan. But beware the potential arrivals of Murchie and loan middle forwards.

Blayke Brailey Sharks HOK ($201,000) Avg: 42PPG. Rd 2: 46 points Surprisingly, many are selling Damien Cook to purchase Api Koroisau. Is that a risky ploy with Brailey as your only back-up in the event of injury? I would normally say yes, but given Brailey played the full 80 minutes in both matches this season for scores of 38 and 46 points respectively, and Harry Grant will likely be there at $180k for us in two weeks as a downgrade, I'm all for it. Brailey is one of the few players not affected by the hiatus. It's his spot, without question, and he is a lock for the safest cash injection of the season.

Verdict: BUY - You can't play Brailey in your best 17, but he should earn in the vicinity of $100k-$150k in a slow burn, or around $80k down to Grant in a few weeks.

Eliesa Katoa Warriors 2RF ($171,900) Avg: 50.5PPG. Rd 2: 50 points What a start for the young backrower, with 51 points in 52 minutes and 50 points in 65 minutes in his two games. Causing havoc with his footwork at the line, a nice offload game and solid defence, it's hard to believe Katoa doesn't demand a spot in the 17. While he was named on the bench in rounds one and two, Katoa was touted to start this week. That hasn't happened and he'll wear No.17. Worryingly, Josh Curran, a prominent edge forward returning from injury, has been named outside the 17, so watch the late mail.

Verdict: BUY - Back in the eyeballs which told us he's here to stay.

Jamil Hopoate Broncos 2RF ($171,900) Avg: 33PPG. Rd 2: 47 points Named to start on the edge for the Broncos (for suspended Tevita Pangai Jr), Hopoate is one of the few -bottom-dollar cheapies locked in to make money. Scores of 19 points (19 minutes) in round one, followed by 47 points (80 minutes) in round two are promising and given TPJ's absence and news David Fifita could be five to six weeks away, there could be enough of a window to make some serious money. KFC SuperCoach Stats has Hopoate conservatively jumping $100k in the next three weeks, even with scores in the 30s.

Verdict: BUY - Looks a solid, short-term win. Sell in round six or seven when TPJ returns, or possibly even hold until Fifita is back.

Kurt Mann Knights CTW/FLB ($287,100) Avg: 53.5PPG. Rd 2: 58 points Mann proved all the doubters wrong in the first two rounds with scores of 49 and 58 points, including a try and a try assist, but also some very solid base stats around the 30 to 35-point range. His halves spot is locked in - he has been named to start this week - but keep an eye out for young gun Phoenix Crossland, who may well have won the No.6 jersey to start the season had it not been for injury.

Verdict: BUY - Every single Kallum Watkins owner should be making this move, and those who already own, sit tight - you'll be making at least $100k in coming weeks.

Emre Guler Raiders FRF ($220,700) Avg: 69PPG. Rd 2: 44 points Guler was all the rage before shutdown, scoring 138 points across his first two matches, sitting with a BE of -69 and with a projected $85,000 price rise after round three. But a lot has changed. John Bateman's likely inclusion in round four will push Corey Horsburgh into the middle rotation exclusively, leaving Guler as likely the last middle forward off the bench. And Hudson Young (suspension) will return in round six. So the extended minutes Guler had in the first two rounds are likely to dip to the 30s quick smart. He will make money, just not as much as first thought.

Verdict: LOW-END BUY - If you already own him, great, but I would not be jumping on unless Bateman is ruled out for a few extra weeks.

Braden Wiliame Dragons CTW ($201,000) Avg: 33PPG. Rd 2: 43 points Scores of 23 and 43 points don't yell "pick me", but something tells me Wiliame has this spot locked down. The Dragons welcome back a host of injured players but all are in the pack. There was one Dragon dropped in the backline, and that was the far more established Tim Lafai, so the safety is there that he's first choice at this point, well ahead of Lafai and Euan Aitken (on bench). A BE of -3 isn't earth shattering, but all it takes is one try to accelerate things.

Verdict: BUY - A very safe (selection wise), low-priced option.

Tyrell Fuimaono Dragons CTW/2RF ($201,000) Avg: 51PPG. Rd 2: 75 points Flashback to the Dragons v Panthers in round two and Fuimaono looked like Jason Taumalolo at times. The 75 points came in 72 minutes with 31 tackles, 10 points in tackle busts, a line break and 22 points in H8s. Like many a cheapie flying high back then, Fuimaono is dealing with the return of established players from injury, in this case the Sims brothers and Cam McInnes. But he's kept his spot, with Lafai, Merrin and Luke dropped before him. It's well deserved.

Verdict: BUY - Bench edge players are normally KFC SuperCoach poison but that 75-point score will stay in Fui's rolling average for three weeks, even while he is off the bench. Handy dual position switch with Isaah Yeo, too.

Ben Hampton Cowboys CTW/FLB ($237,000) Avg: 55PPG. Rd 2: 61 points Just when you think Hampton wouldn't have any upside, he returns scores of 49 and 61 points in the first two rounds with a try in each game. That leaves Hampton with a BE of -36 and projected price rise of $60k after round three. Kallum Watkins owners should take a hard look here, but he is firmly below Kurt Mann, as without a try he will put up a score of 25 or less and halt the price rises. Playing the Titans this weekend could kick him on big time, though.

Verdict: LOW-END BUY - I don't think these scores will continue, but if they do it could be worthwhile jumping on?

Josh Kerr Dragons FRF/2RF ($233,000) Avg: 37PPG. Rd 2: 38 points Talked up in pre-season after a stellar All-Stars performance, Kerr was rumoured to be one of the casualties of the hiatus with the Sims and McInnes returning. Playing around the 30 to 40-minute mark in his first two matches it was touted to be between him, Tyrell Fuimaono, Jacob Host and Trent Merrin for the final two bench spots. But Kerr remains. Huge. No real room for expanded minutes but great news Kerr kept his spot.

Verdict: HOLD - Not a buy, but those who own him take the win.

Billy Walters Tigers HFB/HOK ($201,000) Avg: 49PPG. Rd 2: 47 points Ugh. What a disaster the shutdown was for one of the KFC SuperCoach good news stories. Billy started with 51 and 47 points playing the full 80 minutes both weeks and was looking at some fantastic early-season price rises. Fast forward three months and we have Harry Grant starting at hooker, along with Luke Brooks and Moses Mbye healthy (no opening in the halves). Walters played so well I think he will have great impact off the bench. It just may be much less exciting in terms of output.

Verdict: HOLD - Make the switch to Harry Grant or Fogarty in the halves in a few weeks.

Harry Grant Tigers HOK ($184,900) Huge. Grant named to start in his first game at the club. Here's the upside of the Walters discussion. The Cameron Smith comparisons grow louder and most predicted teams out there seem to have Grant leapfrogging Walters for a starting berth. If Grant (below) finds his way into 65+ minutes at hooker he will likely not only be a buy, he will be a best-17 player most weeks given the attacking upside and his solid defence.

Verdict: WATCHLIST - You can almost certainly lock in a Brailey to Grant switch in two weeks.

Gehamat Shibasaki Knights CTW ($286,400) Avg: 39PPG. Rd 2: 37 points Not a bad start in the opening rounds without any attacking stats. If 40-ish is his "floor" then he will be a nice money-maker for KFC SuperCoaches. Holds his spot in the starting side on the back of those performances, and although Bradman Best is named on an extended bench, I anticipate if a late change were to happen it would be for Enari Tuala, not Gehamat.

Verdict: LOW-END BUY - Solid low-priority cheapie no one is talking about.

Bradman Best Knights CTW ($240,700) Here's potentially a good result after the hiatus. Pre-season cheapie favourite (was in 45 per cent of teams before injury), Best has been named on an extended bench. While that isn't amazing news, you'd expect him (right) to feature over Tuala at left centre, if not straight away as a late inclusion, then in the coming weeks. One that we wouldn't have had for many weeks had the shutdown not happened.

Verdict: WATCHLIST - Keep an eye on late mail.

Pat Mago Rabbitohs FRF ($184,900) What a monster this guy is and named on the bench. A real beneficiary of the COVID-19 break as he killed it in pre-season, according to Damien Cook, and was likely to debut until he went down with a ruptured pec. Now he is hitting the track hard and at $184k with a dream -KFC SuperCoach-style game, he's a lock to make good cash and be one of our cheapies of the year in the front row.

Verdict: BUY - But wait a few weeks on this one. I'm predicting Braden Uele-style numbers from last year if he gets the chance.

Tex Hoy Knights 5/8 ($171,900) This kid is exciting. The roommate of Kalyn Ponga is a chip off the old bunkie if reports are to be believed, and with Ponga suspended for round three he gets his chance to debut at fullback - and is likely to kick goals too. One to watch, and if anything serious were to happen to Ponga at any stage to give Hoy a prolonged period in the side, he will be a stellar KFC SuperCoach cheapie.

Verdict: WATCHLIST - With no Origin during the season, Hoy's only look-in is suspension/injury.

Josh Curran Warriors 2RF ($216,900) There was strong pre-season mail after a big All Stars performance that Curran would be at the forefront of the Warriors' backrow plans. Then he got injured and missed the early rounds. Wacko now has Curran getting the starting edge gig that KFC SuperCoach cheapie favourite Elisea Katoa nabbed in round two and looked fantastic in. Curran found his way to the extended bench, but it looks like he's a wait-and-see for now.

Verdict: WATCHLIST - Very good value if he gets a start. Hopefully not at the expense of Katoa.

Will Kennedy Sharks CTW/FLB ($242,600) Avg: 44.5PPG. Rd 2: 45 points This one sucks as Kennedy was your typical "pick him for a specific time frame to make money" selection, knowing Matt Moylan and Josh Dugan were multiple weeks away with injury. And Kennedy has started brilliantly (44 and 45). Now, switch on here. Even though Kennedy is named to start at fullback this week, expect Moylan (named on extended bench) to be a real chance of a late inclusion.

Verdict: AVOID - Not an urgent sell even if he is dropped in a late change. Will make $40k-$60k next time he plays a match.

Renouf To'omaga Bulldogs 2RF ($244,700) Avg: 44PPG. Rd 2: 54 points To'omaga started very well with 33 and 54 points in rounds one and two - all the more impressive given they came in 30 and 25 minutes respectively. Joe Stimson is out long term, and we all know what has happened to CHN, so To'omaga, Britt (named to start) and the returning Faitala-Mariner look set to usurp all the available minutes. Don't mind this because a POD move with the extra trades negates the risk.

Verdict: LOW-END BUY

Zane Musgrove Tigers FRF ($201,000) Avg: 26PPG, Rd 2: 29 points There he goes. Dropped after scores of 23 and 29 points in rounds one and two. It has been underwhelming for a guy with NRL experience. There was a marked improvement from week one to week two, which can maybe be explained by the several-year absence from the game. But thankfully those who read the Cheapie Bible had him firmly in third on the FRF cheapie list to start the season behind Toby Rudolf and JTB.

Verdict: SELL

GONE!

Kallum Watkins Titans CTW ($271,800) Avg: 36PPG, Rd 2: 24 points Tragically, England centre Watkins has been forced to quit the NRL to return home after his father was -diagnosed with the coronavirus. He will not play another game this -season. We wish he and his family the best. Verdict: MUST TRADE now