SAINT

After four months in the spinal unit at his Wakefield Hospital, Mose Masoe has returned home to his partner and children in the north of England. Before leaving, he bought and handed out small gifts to each and every one on the medical staff who have assisted him in recovery.

SINNER The NRL's hopelessly inadequate penalties handed down to the players who breached COVID-19 protocols and put the season resumption and hundreds of jobs at risk. This is a first-round failure for acting chief executive Andrew Abdo, who should, at the very least, have overruled the Integrity Unit and banned players for a month.

SHOOSH Which old rugby league legend is threatening to withdraw from The Daily Telegraph NRL tipping competition if winners from the first two rounds are scrapped? He tipped eight from eight, his first-ever clean sweep, in round two.

SHOOSH II We're hearing NRL referees will be on the same deal as the players when they return to work, with 80 per cent pay cuts. The refs resume part-time training tomorrow.

SHOOSH III No worries for one Victorian sports star who has found a way around the state's golf ban by buying a $10,000 simulator for his lounge room.

SHOOSH IV To coincide with State of Origin in November, there's talk of Tonga, New Zealand and England playing a Tri-series of Test matches. It is hoped venues will be open to the public by then in New Zealand and Australia.

SPOTTED A PACER named Buzz Rothfield, a two-year-old bay colt sired by a nag called Sportswriter, having a trial at Albion Park in Brisbane on Friday. Buzz will be trained and driven by the highly regarded Tayla Gillespie. We'll let you know when he's ready to race.

SPOTTED II THE great Gus Gould getting a haircut and visiting a Post Office in the Shire on Tuesday.

SPOTTED IV Brett Kimmorley - still looking fit enough to play - pounding the footpaths around Caringbah and Miranda.

SPOTTED VMy north-of-the-border colleague Peter Badel filing an exclusive from Ward 7E of the Wesley Hospital in Brisbane on Tuesday. "Bomber" had surgery for a stomach hernia but it couldn't stop him reaching for the laptop he brought along just in case a big NRL story broke.