NRL COACHES KNOW THE AXE CAN SWIFTLY FALL BUT ONCE SHOWN THE DOOR, THE NEXT ONE THAT OPENS MIGHT WELL BE THE DOOR TO THE 'REAL' WORLD, WRITES DAVID RICCIO FORMER Gold Coast coach Garth Brennan spent more than 20 years selling the game of rugby league.

Now he's in Newcastle, selling houses.

Just over 12 months after being sacked by the Titans, Brennan has resurfaced as a real estate agent.

"I love the game and if the right job came along be it in junior development or the lower grades again, I'd love it," Brennan said.

"But I've got bills to pay, a young family to provide for, so I can't wait around.

"Property investment and real estate has always been a big passion of mine, so I'm having a big crack at it." Mark Murray, the former Queensland State of Origin, Roosters and Melbourne coach, is also in the property game, selling $1 million waterfront houses in Brisbane.

Famous for falling agonisingly short of winning the 2001 premiership with Parramatta, Brian Smith is a coach no more. Lately, he has been working on winning ratings as an Uber driver.

Arthur Kitinas is still running the Marrickville tyre shop he's manned since he left Souths in 2004 and remember Brian 'Bluey' McLennan, the Warriors coach from 2012?

He's also working with cars, repairing transmissions, outside of Auckland. Phil Economidis, the 67-year-old former coach of the 1997 Gold Coast Chargers, continues to coach in Belgrade, while former Manly coach Geoff Toovey catches the bus to the city each day for his job as a chartered accountant.

Welcome to the afterlife for an NRL coach - a place where our favourite mentors and master -tacticians learn to start again.

Cold, callous and cut-throat, the pressure on coaches from fans and football club boards has resulted already this season in Dean Pay (Canterbury), Stephen Kearney (Warriors), Paul Green (North Queensland) and Paul McGregor (St George Illawarra) leaving their clubs.

If the Broncos part ways with the heavily-scrutinised Anthony Seibold, it will be the most coaches let go during a season in 22 years.

So what becomes of our once-revered leaders?

Where do they go, what do they do and how do they feel when they read about another one of their brethren being shown the door?

Despite his brief stint in the top job at the Titans, where he won 12 of 40 games, Brennan while shattered to have his career crushed, didn't waste time wallowing in his sudden exit.

He dusted himself off and secured work at the NRL earlier this year, reviewing the performance of referees, before he fell victim of the COVID-19 crisis that led to job cuts at League Central.

The 48-year-old has since returned to his home of Newcastle where he's a budding real estate agent and property investor.

"I enjoyed that," Brennan said of his role with the NRL. "My priority wasn't to get back into it (NRL coaching). It was to get my family back home and life settled.

"I always like a challenge, so I said 'what's next' and real estate is a really good challenge.

"It's (real estate) always been something I've been passionate about. I've always been into investment properties and it's a -challenge I'm enjoying.

"They're a young and enthusiastic firm (Creative Property Co) and I'm learning the ropes with them. I'm seeing all these coaches getting sacked and so I'm grateful at the moment." The loneliness and uncertainty that coaches feel after being axed is why former Raiders, Cowboys and Titans coach Neil Henry is passionate about setting-up rugby league's first-ever coaches association, both to provide support and a collective voice for the game's leading mentors.

Kitinas was smart enough to realise that NRL coaching doesn't last forever. He had his tyre shop to fall back on when he left the Rabbitohs while another coach, former Cronulla mentor Stuart Raper made the timely decision to buy a formal wear business only a few weeks -before his sacking from the Sharks in 2006.

"Most coaches are ex-players, who have only ever been in rugby league, so they really don't have anything to fall back on when that time comes," Raper said.

"Others make a bit of money out of their careers, while there's others like me, who wasn't at that great height for a long time, so to have the formal hire business was very fortunate. With that going, I was able to do some work with Fox Sports, the Men of League and now the NSWRL (referee high performance manager) for the past three years, so I'm one of the lucky ones who has been able to stay involved with the game." Both Kitinas and Raper agreed that with their exit from elite level coaching unfolding more than 15 years ago, the pressure on results today, had gone to a new level.

"It's the nature of the beast. You're hired to be fired," Raper said. "As (former coach) Warren Ryan would say, 'Coaches should rent, not buy'.

"It's hard to have longevity in the game, you have to be exceptionally good. You've got to have a good squad, you have to have a good organisation.

"A prime example of that is the Roosters, from top to bottom, they recruit well and support their coaches by putting support around them." On the phone from his Marrickville work shop, Kitinas added: "You feel for them (sacked coaches), for different reasons.

"The thing is with all of them is that sometimes there's things that are out of their control that lead to that failure.

"Recruitment can make or break a coach and influences around the club can make it very difficult to do your job. "So just because they're sacked, doesn't mean they're necessarily a bad coach."