Promoters strike pay dirt" "with fans hungry for" 'superfight' showdown" THE Sydney Superfight is set to break the all-time Australian pay-per-view record of Anthony Mundine and Danny Green in 2006.

The double billing of Tim Tszyu's world title elimination fight against Bowyn Morgan, and heavyweight showdown between league legend Paul Gallen against UFC giant Mark Hunt, is on track to becoming the biggest-selling boxing event in Australian history by surpassing 200,000 purchases.

The list of top PPV boxing events in Australia can finally be revealed, and it is -remarkable that the son of Kostya Tszyu and a former NSW State of Origin captain can combine to outsell not only Mundine and Green, but pugilist superstars Floyd Mayweather and Manny Pacquiao in this country.

It's understood that pre-sales for the Sydney Superfight have already surpassed Tszyu's previous bout against Jeff Horn, an event that stunned Main Event officials by outselling Horn-Mundine and Horn-Pacquiao.

No doubt COVID-19 played a role, with a number of sports and major global events cancelled amid lockdowns, increasing the appetite for live content, however, Tszyu's stunning performance also catapulted him into next phase of pay-per-view stardom.

No Limit Promotions, which promotes Tszyu and Gallen, then decided to put both men on the same card at Bankwest Stadium rather than on separate events, and it has been a masterstroke.

No Limit chief executive, the former NRL star George Rose, was in the Sydney Football Stadium on May 17, 2006, when Mundine defeated Green, and this will be the first stadium boxing event in the city since that famous night when the PPV record was set and remains unsurpassed.

"We'd love to break that record, it would be huge for us," Rose told The Daily Telegraph.

"If we don't do it now, we'll be looking for it in the next one. "We'll keep trying to chase those titles from our side of the fence, that's what we want to do.

"And for Tim, once he fights for a world title and -becomes a world champion, he's going to have that platform for everyone else to be a part of as well.

"It is epic, we went to Mundine-Green and we were kids then, watching the fight, we had tickets in the stands but we managed to jump the fence to get down on the grass.

"As boxing fans as kids, that was one of the coolest nights we were ever at in Sydney.

"The fact we're hosting the next stadium show in Sydney, it's surreal. "We've lined up the card to the point where every fight is going to be entertaining - we've got characters here in Australian boxing, quality fighters." Adding to the magnitude of the event is the WBO's announcement that super-welterweight champion Patrick Teixeira, of Brazil, must lock in his title defence by January 6.

Teixeira can't get out of Brazil due to COVID, and is unlikely to be able to secure travel to fight against No.1 contender Brian Castano within three weeks.

If he cannot fight, the WBO will strip him of the title and announce that Castano and Tszyu will fight for the vacant title, with Teixeira as No.1 contender to fight the winner once he can travel again.

Negotiations are already under way to host the potential Tszyu-Castano world title fight in Australia next year.

"I'm excited that we might be able to fight for a world title here, and Tim deserves it, he is at that level," Rose said.

"If he can put on a good performance against Bowyn Morgan he deserves the shot, and the WBO agrees."

BIGGEST PPV BOXING EVENTS IN AUSTRALIA 1. Anthony Mundine vs Danny Green May 17, 2006, Sydney. PPV buys: 200,000 2. Floyd Mayweather vs Manny Pacquiao May 2, 2015, Las Vegas. PPV buys: 195,000 3. Floyd Mayweather vs Conor McGregor August 26, 2017, Nevada. PPV buys: 190,000 4. Anthony Mundine vs Danny Green II February 3, 2017, Adelaide. PPV buys: 100,000 5. Tim Tszyu vs Jeff Horn August 26, 2020, Townsville. PPV buys: 94,000 6. Anthony Mundine vs Jeff Horn November 30, 2018, Brisbane. PPV buys: 73,000 7. Jeff Horn vs Manny Pacquiao July 2, 2017, Brisbane. PPV buys: 63,000