THE World Health Organisation has found it "impossible" to trace the origins of COVID-19 despite a 28-day investigation in Wuhan, dismissing suggestions it was leaked from a Chinese lab or came from a wet market.

The team handed down their findings at a press conference in Wuhan late yesterday, after a month of meetings and site visits in the Chinese city where the virus was first identified in December 2019.

WHO scientists, appearing alongside their Chinese counterparts, said the most likely possibility was that the virus had spilled over from an animal into humans or may have come from frozen food.

The findings appear to back Communist Party protestations that the virus may have originated from outside of its borders. Peter Ben Embarek, the head of the WHO mission, said: "The laboratory incident hypothesis is extremely unlikely to explain the introduction of the virus into the human population." Dr Embarek said the investigation had uncovered new information but had not dramatically changed the picture of the outbreak.

Liang Wannian, who heads the Chinese team of experts, ruled out the Huanan Seafood Market as an origin source, saying the virus could have been circulating in other regions of China several weeks before it was identified there.

"While some of the early cases had an association with the Huanan seafood market, others were associated with another market and some no market at all," Prof Liang said.

He said the team believed the virus originated in animals - likely bats or pangolins - but the intermediate hosts that allowed it to jump to humans were "yet to be identified".

He also said no bats in the wild in China had been found to be carrying viruses that may have mutated into COVID-19.

The virus could have been circulating in other regions before it was identified in Wuhan, he said. The WHO team agreed, with Dr Embarek adding: "The possible path from whatever original animal species, all the way through the Huanan market, could have taken a very long and convoluted path involving movement across borders, travels etc before arriving in the Huanan market."

KEY FINDINGS ■ Lab theory 'extremely unlikely' ■ Huanan Seafood Market unlikely to be original source of outbreak ■ Frozen food is being probed as a potential carrier of the virus ■ Study points to virus originating in bats - but it is unlikely they were in Wuhan