SO often we fall back to Johnny Sattler when the greatness of the game needs to be told.

He is part of the game's conscience, a position he never fought for or claimed but inherits through actions.

Satts long ago became a symbol of what it was and what it meant to play rugby league. That's when they spoke of character, teamwork and sacrifice.

He was tougher than he is remembered for and was a whole lot meaner, too. What remains unquestioned is when the battle was on Satts was the man teammates looked to for help to get them through. He knew he was not the most talented player but he knew he could sacrifice for them.

So when Souths played Manly in the 1970 grand final, the Sea Eagles knew they had to get Satts out of the way and broke his jaw in two places 10 minutes in, Satts asked a teammate to help him up because he didn't want to show he was hurt, and knew he had to get up and keep playing for the same reason Manly tried to take him out.

He was the leader.

He spent much of the rest of the game as a decoy runner, taking pressure off teammates who, in turn, were stealing his runs to protect him from more damage.

Some years earlier, Sattler made a more personal sacrifice when he toured with the 1967 Kangaroos. The tour opened with a win over Warrington on September 30 and ended with a third Test loss to France on January 8 - more than three months later.

He chose to go on the tour, away from family and to share a room in a hotel with other young men who were not all house trained, while he left his pregnant wife at home, because it was going to benefit the family long term.

That is sacrifice.

Players were almost always happy to go on three-month Kangaroo tours. Ashes cricketers are away for similar periods. Still, it was also a personal choice.

Terry Lamb was selected in the 1982 Kangaroos but withdrew. Lamb had a wedding date with his future wife, Kim.

Another player also pulled out of the '82 Kangaroo tour. This time he wanted to go but his wife refused to let him cancel their wedding. He stayed home, got married, and then divorced a couple of years later. He probably should have identified a problem the night the Kangaroos were read out.

Character reveals itself at different times.

When David Furner got picked in 1994 he also had a wedding he had to attend, as the groom, but in conversation with his future wife, Kelly, they understood the opportunity and what it might do for their lives, together, and Furner toured. The wedding was postponed. The only negative it made to their lives was they now say they have been married 25 years, not 26.

Today's players seem to think a little closer to home.

This week Brisbane's most senior player, Darius Boyd, said he will not relocate to Sydney if it meant getting the competition started again.

"No chance in hell I could do four months away from my family and that's something I wouldn't be OK with," Boyd told the local news.

Where Boyd got four months from is unclear. That is absolutely worst case, and so unlikely it will almost certainly not happen.

Was he trying to bring weight to his refusal to move?

North Queensland have privately questioned relocating to NSW given the circumstances like that of Michael Morgan, whose wife is due in August.

Most of the focus to resuming the competition has been getting the Warriors to Australia. They have agreed to relocate so a 16-team comp can resume. It means leaving family at home.

There are natural concerns. Chiefly, if an emergency happens and the player must return home he will be forced to endure quarantine for two weeks before being able to see his family.

That is troublesome yet the Warriors understand what is at stake. The NRL is considering bringing their families with them. They wobbled slightly earlier this season when they stated they wanted to return home rather than quarantine on the Gold Coast.

The reality of the business then visited them when they were quietly told if they did return to New Zealand, and the NRL season continued without them, they would not be paid.

They vowed to stay on another round until a week later when the whole season shut. This economic reality is still missed on some of the players, even after their own Rugby League Players Association agreed to a 72 per cent pay cut for the rest of their financial year.

ARL Commission chairman Peter V'landys has fought hard to resume the season. He has suffered attacks from various ignorants who refuse to concede the NRL is an industry employing thousands, like all those construction sites that continue to work.

Yet V'landys has pushed on for what is the greater good.

The difficulty appears now to be the Queensland clubs and that state's premier Annastacia Palaszczuk, who has closed her borders and declared any Queensland-based player returning to the state must undergo a 14-day quarantine. In other words, Queensland teams would have to relocate to NSW to make the competition work.

Then she said Origin could not be played in Queensland. And then, perhaps realising she has just dropped an election clanger, she had the temerity to say if an Origin could not be played in Queensland then the series should not be played at all.

A couple of days after Boyd's refusal Gold Coast winger Dale Copley, a players' union rep, said the Queensland teams were considering a demand similar to the Warriors.

If they relocate, their families must also go with them.

Just as the season looks on track to resume, the players are making demands that could unravel it all.

This is the time for RLPA chief executive Clint Newton to be the leader. Since the game went into shutdown Newton has been the highly visible boss of the players union. He has done a good job of managing up. Earlier this month Newton confirmed the players had managed to "get a seat at the table" in future salary cap discussions.

This week he said the RLPA wanted "a seat at the table" in future broadcast negotiations, which they received.

Yet it is irrelevant if he can't keep the players united underneath him and present them to the resumption of the season. If the sacrifice is too big for Boyd, or Morgan, they have every right to remain home. But it should not be allowed to be considered as a potential reason to prevent the season resuming.

It is impossible to resume under ideal circumstances. The world simply isn't ready for it yet. Sacrifices have to be made. The incentive for the players, besides winning a premiership, is a resumption of salary. They are not unique in this. Sports around the world are considering similar strategies, or have had to find ways to continue.

Pakistan has not played a home Test since Sri Lanka was attacked by terrorists in Lahore in 2009. That is their price to play Test cricket.

The Autumn Carnival ends with two Group 1 races at Randwick today, the Champagne Stakes (1600m) and the All Aged Stakes (1400m), worth several hundred thousand dollars to the winner.

Hugh Bowman rides the favourite, King's Legacy, in the Champagne and another strong chance, Bivouac, in the All Aged. For weeks Bowman has lived in a little one-bedroom apartment across the road from Randwick racecourse, isolating himself.

He knows better than most the Autumn Carnival is money time for jockeys. Bowman did not want to risk catching COVID-19 and taking it home to his family or, more likely, catching it at home and being barred from the track.

He understands the sacrifice, like Johnny Sattler.

In '67 Sattler returned from a three-month Kangaroo tour to meet his new daughter, then five weeks old.

SHORT SHOTS JUST last Friday, Richard Freedman appeared on Fox League Live talking about some of the champion racehorses he and his brothers have trained over the years, when the conversation drifted onto other champions of the turf.

Might And Power was always a champion and Yvonne Sampson spoke fondly of heading to Living Legends last year to visit the old champ, who was a favourite for both of us. She even sent me a photo of her feeding him carrots at the time.

It was unbelievable, then, to wake 48 hours later and learn he had succumbed to a bout of colic. The sorrow from fans that followed proved romance still exists at the track.

So it is hoped that as they remain racing through the Autumn Carnival, which ends today at Randwick, the fact racing has been the only live sport on TV will give it an audience that will deliver more fans in the future.

The only pity is racing missed a designated star, like last year when Winx thrilled us all.

As for the rest of our television viewing, there are only so many 30 For 30 repeats anyone can watch.The early winners for me are the re-runs of old fights and the darts.