hibernation FOR 53 HOURS FROM TONIGHT, CLICK FRENZY WILL HAVE MORE THAN 1000 DEALS AND OFFERS UP FOR GRABS

IF you missed bagging a bargain in last month's end-of-financial-year sales, get yourself in front of a laptop tonight because Click Frenzy have added a new event to their calendar.

After a record-breaking online sales event in May - with more than 5.4 million visits to participating retailers - the Australian founded and owned digital-only bargain hunters' paradise introduced another event to their calendar, Julove.

The event will run for 53 hours and offer more than 1000 deals and exclusive offers from in excess of 150 brands selling in a range of categories including fashion, food, alcohol, toys, pets, electrical, sport and leisure and more, including retailers from the travel industry.

Click Frenzy managing director Grant Arnott said they hoped the added event would not only be great for consumers but help Australian retailers in these trying times.

"This is the first time we're doing an event in July, the main event happens in November and five years ago, we launched Click Frenzy Mayhem in May," he said.

"When we conceived the event in 2012, we made sure this was an Australian founded and owned online shopping event. When people shop Click Frenzy, they are helping Australian retailers and providing significant stimulus over the course of a couple of days.

"COVID-19 has created a massive shift that we're witnessing and it's creating a new breed of online shopper who were previously mainly a store shopper and may have been resistant for fear of fraud.

"We're offering the same stimulus package that we introduced at our recent Mayhem event, allowing retailers to take up on a free advertising opportunity to feature their deals. Retailers such as Eco Kids, Ecology and ISHKA have taken up this stimulus, allowing them to get in front of millions of prepped and primed shoppers." Self-confessed online shopaholic Clara Bartlett is gearing up for tonight's sale and said she tends to prefer Australian brands over others.

"I love how the sales have everything in one place, so it's easy to log on to the website and you can see every website, you don't have to shop around, you can search for the type of item you want and find it," the 30-year-old said.

"I do prefer Australian brands, especially in fashion and a lot of the smaller boutiques I like are not available in lots of places, especially Adelaide." Ms Bartlett said her focus tonight would be bagging a bargain on homewares. "It's always mostly been fashion and clothing [when I shop online] but now I'm looking at buying a house, I've been searching for homewares, basically anything I will need to fill the house, I will have ready once I've bought it.

"I do shop a bit on Black Friday and Cyber Monday and the Vogue Online Shopping night. I prefer online shopping because I'm too busy and can't always get into the store between 9-5pm or on the weekends." On average, shoppers spend $381 in the Mayhem sale, with an average saving of $158.10 but the actual range of items and prices is extensive.

Australian Retailers Association CEO Paul Zahra said the impact COVID-19 has had on the industry should not be underestimated.

"It's a great opportunity to try online shopping if you haven't before, and Click Frenzy is a great time to find a great deal, support our local brands and as a consequence, keep someone in a job.

What's the big deal * Virgin Australia: up to 30% off domestic flights (travel until October 31 this year) * Hoot Holidays: Port Douglas, five nights from $790, twin share * Bose: up to 50% off headphones * Harris Scarfe: 40% off manchester * Shaver Shop: up to 70% off best-selling brands including Dyson, Gillette, Braun, Philips * HP: Notebook 14-inch laptop 20% off * Dyson: extra 10% off V8 Origin * Michael Hill: 50% off silver jewellery, 30% off gold jewellery * Gorman: 20-70% off sitewide * Fossil: 20% off full priced items * Koala Living: 55% off storewide (dining tables, couches, lounge furniture etc) * Adidas: 40% off assorted collection * E-Living Furniture: Up to 70% storewide (bedding, bedroom, lounge furniture) * Go Gaga deal: (99% off) - KitchenAid ($629) for $6