AUSTRALIAN sport has rediscovered its voice. A voice that roars and booms and wails and exalts and tells the ref his eyes appear to be painted on. How we have missed that voice in the year that emptied the grandstands.

It's the human equivalent of birdsong. Let's call it crowdsong. Crowdsong returned on Wednesday night when a capacity chorus of 52,500 supporters were allowed to pull up a pew and grab a brew for the deciding State of Origin match between Queensland and NSW.

It was the first full house in Australia since COVID-19 hit sport for six in March.

The sort of spine-tingling, fist-shaking, foot-stomping full-throated crowdsong not witnessed since Alyssa Healy belted a half-century and Australia's wonderful women cricketers won the T20 World Cup in front of a near--maximum throng of 86,174 at the MCG in March.

Origin isn't Origin without the patrons. Hear, hear. The swarming mass of purists, pissheads, diehards and dandies. Origin at Suncorp - the greatest cathedral in league - would not have been Origin at Suncorp if the seats were unattended.

Politicians normally get booed at sporting events but after Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk became the first state leader to allow the glorious Full House sign to go up, she was more likely to get the Wally Lewis Medal for the most valuable contribution to the series.

She seems quite the footy head. After she stopped ignoring NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian just long enough to text "Queenslander" after the Maroons' victory in Origin I.

Announcing the green light for a maximum crowd, she even referred to Suncorp as "the cauldron".

It was estimated 2200 of the 52,500 seats were to be filled by folks from NSW. It was a wonder Palaszczuk let that many in. The AFL grand final at the 'Gabba in Brisbane was restricted to 29,707.

There was the sense of something missing … that something was the crowdsong. The NRL grand final at ANZ Stadium in Sydney was kept to 37,303. It was still missing … the crowdsong. The Melbourne Cup had an official crowd figure of zero.

Not only was Origin III the biggest crowd in Australian sport since COVID-19, it was the biggest in the world.

Crowdsong had been so sorely missed that television broadcasts developed fake cheering. Footage from the NBA basketball finals in America had fake fans. A virtual Barack Obama, for instance, was in the stands. On Wednesday night in Brisbane, real people were back … and so was something elemental to a grand sporting occasion. The crowdsong.