PAUL Gallen and Mark Hunt are poised for a Halloween showdown. Details are being finalised for a boxing bout between the former NRL hardman and UFC knockout king.

Four venues are in the -running to stage the heavyweight trans-Tasman battle: Sydney's Qudos Bank Arena, Spark Stadium in Auckland, Newcastle's McDonald Jones -Stadium and Carrington Park in Bathurst.

Negotiations are at such an advanced stage that a proposed fight date of October 30 or 31 (Halloween) has been pencilled in.

Fight promoter Matt Rose confirmed the four venues were competing for the event. "This fight has attracted huge interest and will be a sellout wherever we decide to take the fight," Rose said.

"Gallen is an NRL legend and one of, if not the, toughest footballer in the last 20 years, and Mark Hunt is a UFC legend who hits harder than any fighter in the country.

"It's scary and makes for a perfect Halloween showdown. I hope to lock away the venue in the coming weeks before getting the final sign-off from both fighters." Ill feeling between the pair is high and speculation was rife earlier this year that Gallen could fight Hunt, who had signed a contract for the bout in March. However, the COVID-19 lockdown put a halt to talks.

Gallen, 38, has not yet signed a contract to fight 46-year-old Hunt, who had suggested Gallen was cowering away from the clash after he had signed on. However, the former NSW State of Origin enforcer hit back.

"Mate, you signed your contract today and you've released it and made it public," Gallen said. "How long did it take you to sign that contract? Three to four weeks, and you've made it public today that you've signed it and you expect me to make a decision today.

"You know how contracts work, they don't happen overnight. I've had my first conversation with the promoter about four o'clock this afternoon, you've had three or four weeks to get it done.

"Rest assured mate, I don't need any encouragement. We will get the deal done, and the fight will happen. Just give me a week and we'll see what happens." The coronavirus lockdown then stopped all plans for a live boxing event, and it appeared the bout may not happen. But the proposed fight date and narrowing of venues are the biggest signs the showdown will take place this year.

All four venues can host more than 20,000 spectators. Carrington Park hosted an Elton John concert earlier this year with that number.

This will be the biggest fight of Gallen's boxing career, and will have crossover interest from mixed martial arts fans given Hunt's storied career in the UFC. Hunt was released from his contract by the UFC 12 months ago, but is still in the middle of legal action against the organisation for allegedly allowing drug-cheating fighters to compete against him in the Octagon.