Australia is enduring economic challenges because China cannot cope with our demands for an investigation into the origins of the coronavirus.

For a mob that wishes to be perceived as a major global influence, China's communist dictatorship is remarkably petty and thin-skinned.

To this point, China has already put tariffs or embargoes on numerous Australian exports. Unable to deal with Australia on anything like a serious diplomatic level, China instead uses brute economic force.

It's the dictatorship's only negotiating tactic. We either run quiet on the origins of the corona-virus, and the need to understand the source in case of future outbreaks, or China will hurt our farmers, winegrowers and broader agricultural sector.

Thankfully, the Australian government has refused to yield, despite China's latest vindictive move - cutting Australian wheat imports to the lowest level since 2011.

This strategy seems especially targeted, considering the bumper wheat crop for Australian farmers. Forecasts tip a 31 million tonne result, nearly double the previous outcome.

Besides our farmers, the biggest losers out of this will be China's own citizens. They are already paying over the odds for other high-quality Australian products and now will be pushed financially towards second-rate grain.

In that light, it is worth considering how China might behave towards Australia if it had greater punitive powers over us than barriers to trade.

For example, just look at how China is treating one of its own citizens after she sought to investigate the beginnings of COVID-19 in Wuhan.

Former lawyer turned citizen journalist Zhang Zhan travelled to the pandemic epicentre in February, and subsequently reported on the detention of other like-minded independent journalists by Chinese authorities.

Additionally, Zhang reported government harassment of families of coronavirus victims who demanded accountability.

Then China's tyrants stepped in. Zhang was arrested in May.

Charged in early November with "picking quarrels and provoking trouble" and "causing the public order to be seriously chaotic", Zhang has now been sentenced. She will be imprisoned for four years - for reporting.