THE traditional mid-season State of Origin series could be under threat if NRL fans get their way.

The Origin series has long wreaked havoc with the NRL competition, diluting the quality of teams because it's played between matches over six weeks in the middle of the year.

But in the 2020 NRL Fans' Poll, produced in conjunction with nrl.com, fans have had enough and thrown support behind a stand-alone series.

More than 37 per cent of respondents backed playing the series after the regular season, while 34 per cent supported playing games during a stand-alone period in the middle of the year. Just 28 per cent of fans want to keep the traditional format of playing in between club rounds.

The COVID-19 lay-off has forced the NRL to reschedule this year's series to the end of the season for the first time.

Fans have given Queensland little hope of ending NSW's two-year winning streak - just 20 per cent voted for a Maroons series victory.

They did, however, give the Sunshine State a boost in regards to expansion when 52 per cent voted to increase the number of teams. Brisbane was the most favoured destination (23 per cent) ahead of Perth (21 per cent) and the NSW Central Coast (13 per cent).

The innovations introduced under ARL Commission chairman Peter V'landys' administration - the move back to one referee, the six-again rule and the captain's challenge - all got a big tick from the fans.

More than 81 per cent believed the six-again rule was good for the sport and 94 per cent want to retain the captain's challenge.

On the whole, fans' attitudes towards referees seem to be improving - 68 per cent rated their performance as a three out of five or higher.

The influence of the bunker proved to be a controversial topic. While 52.88 per cent of fans want it to be used less, 42 per cent want its powers to be expanded to allow for rulings on forward passes in try--scoring situations.

There was overwhelming support for the suburban ground policy change, giving hope to the likes of Brookvale Oval, Leichhardt Oval and Jubilee Oval for the future. More than 85 per cent of respondents backed the NRL's decision to develop suburban grounds instead of relocating matches to bigger stadiums.