Questions for a nation in denial Sharri Markson (China's sneaky move, column 16/5) is quite right in her assertions about China's role in this absolutely awful pandemic that is reeking disaster on the world.

The question is why won't China let the WHO and other world health bodies investigate the source of this pandemic which after all started there?

Why did China allow International flights (not domestic) to leave Wuhan when they knew how deadly this virus was?

Why does the Chinese government continue to deny responsibility for the pandemic?

Having destroyed the economies of the world, having the virus kill 300,000 people worldwide, you would think they would be contrite not show this arrogance along with this attitude to get even with any country that might question their actions.

What makes it worse is that some within the ABC and Nine newspapers appear to have become apologists for China.

John Kelly, Koolewong

Australia must unite and stand up to trade bully Thank you James Morrow for your excellent and timely response to China's miserable and dishonest handling of the COVID-19 pandemic (Buy together or die together, column 16/5).

I was shocked to read that only 68 per cent of Australians "feel less favourable to China's system of government".

I would have expected it would be much closer to 100 per cent, given the enormity of the devastation caused by this global pandemic.

Unfortunately, there are apparently politicians and party followers of the CCP ideologies that perhaps accounts for the shortfall - democracy does come at a price.

Australians must unite and defend our hard fought for values and say "up yours" to China's tariff threats and standover tactics to deflect their undeniable accountability.

Graeme Hodder, Callala Bay

Support for new outfits Regarding the trade boycott threats from China, fellow Aussies look through your household and what do you see is the origin of most of the products "made in China".

I have a suggestion - you must have sufficient clobber in your household to last for some time. Just boycott the People's Republic of China by not purchasing any of the products made there.

There are many other countries manufacturing clothes etc such as Bangladesh or India and numerous others that would no doubt be glad to break into our markets. Give them a fair go and see how the communists like that.

Robert Lee, Worrowing Heights

Oops, Labor slips up The Labor Party has been supporting anti-bullying in the workplace for years, however its leadership now appears to be supporting China who is the bully in the playground (Labor's great wall, 15/5).

Australia must take a stance and stand up for our country as the bullying will only get worse.

China has used stealth and has quietly infiltrated this country until one day, oops, we are no longer in charge.

JA Jones, Tea Gardens

When 'loony left' is right Forget COVID-19 … this is serious. For the very first time in my 74 years on Planet Earth, I find myself in complete agreement with the utterances of well-known left-wingers including Bill Shorten, Deb O'Neill, The Australian Workers' Union and, disturbingly, Penny Wong (Labor's great wall, 15/5).

Their call for Australia to "hold its nerve" against China's call to threaten our county with trade sanctions if we pursue our call for an international inquiry into the Chinese government's role in COVID-19, is to be applauded.

It does cause one to reconsider one's perception when some in what I consider the loony left are making a kind of sense.

Alan, Umina Beach

Under cloudless skies Kudos to Adella Beaini for her story and Justin Lloyd for his picture of twins Katie and Amy Glasgow in Saturday's Telegraph (Twins who always book their rides, 16/5).

Wide-open spaces, horses, cloudless sapphire blue skies and two fresh-faced girls who love their uncluttered lives.

What could possibly make us love Australia any more than we do? Lee Du Bray, Sydney

Jaws of a dilemma A young man climbs scaffolding to gain entry into the Australian Museum in the early hours of the morning (Hunt for bonehead in brazen night at the museum, 16/5). While in there he takes selfies, one with his head in the jaws of a T-Rex skeleton.

Fossicking around ancient artefacts and old bones and samples might seem an extreme way to pass the time in this pandemic time but he was acting alone so he can't be nabbed on the social-distancing issue. But, he was dressed in double denim, that should be a crime in itself.

I wonder if he will resist the urge to post his pictures on Facebook and if his friends will dob him in. If so the police will pay him a visit and he'll be history. Funny that.

Marg Swindells, Castle Hill

Grate expectations "Prepare for the worst, expect the best, take what comes with a smile" is a great adage for Australians to reflect on.

I am not sure that coronavirus would apply to this adage but the Australian government has certainly done its best, after preparing for the worst with the help of Aussies taking what comes with a "smile".

I hope the smile lasts when we see the end results of JobKeeper and Jobseeker. Janice Russell, Malua Bay

Origin to come at end Now that the NRL has created a precedent to hold the State of Origin at the end of the 2020 season due to the COVID-19, I suggest that all future Origin competitions be held at the end of the normal club competition.

The club competition should have priority over State of Origin. NRL fans want their teams to concentrate on winning the competition, with no breaks for the State of Origin.

John Guider, Bateau Bay

Briefly …

The Communist Party of China should heed their own advice in quoting President Abraham Lincoln (Lincoln a tool for the latest PRC fools, 16/5). "You cannot fool all the people all the time." The Chinese people may finally wake up to their regimen … as the people of Hong Kong have done.

Erich, Glen Alpine "" " Notice the reports on how clear the atmosphere is in the Northern Hemisphere. Yet their coal-fired power stations have been chugging away. Seems the pollution problem is more about 1.2 billion motor vehicles and 25,000 commercial planes than the demon coal.

Doug, Port Macquarie "" " Wanting to go soft on China is why Anthony Albanese has again shown he is not up to running the country (Labor's great wall, 15/5).

G Hutton, Saratoga "" " The stance taken by some Labor parliamentarians on China proves without courage, wisdom bears no fruit (Labor's great wall, 15/5).

Simon A Pijaca, Glenhaven "" " When the world is back to normal and world travel is permitted, I believe Australia should send our PM and his family on a two-week holiday due to his fantastic efforts in steering us through these troubled times. Hawaii would be nice. Maybe also send (at NSW's expense) Shane Fitzsimmons and his family for his bushfire efforts.

Denis, Eagle Vale "" " Can't believe the number of people resisting the COVIDSafe app. A chance to save a life - maybe even their own. I have found that resisters are generally those known as narks.

Cookie, Sawtell

HAVE YOUR SAYMAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001