Patient Zero mystery

THE source of the Avalon cluster that threw Christmas plans into disarray and put thousands of people across Sydney into isolation may remain a mystery, the state's chief health officer has said.

Seven locally-acquired cases of COVID-19 were reported from almost 24,000 tests yesterday, including a firefighter from the northern beaches. The source of the firefighter's infection is still under investigation. The man attended the Belrose Hotel on December 11, sparking an expanded call for patrons to come forward for testing.

Dr Kerry Chant said anyone who attended the Belrose Hotel between 12pm and 6pm on December 11 should get a COVID test "irrespective of whether you have symptoms or not".

Anyone who has visited the hotel at all in December is also being urged to get tested if they have had any symptoms.

"Even if you historically had an illness that you think in retrospect might have been compatible with COVID, please get a test," Dr Chant said yesterday.

She said a man in his 20s - who works at the hotel - was "one of the earliest" cases in the cluster, after reporting "a very short period of fever" on December 10.

The call for testing at the Belrose Hotel is in a bid to track down potential chains of transmission that may have sparked the Avalon cluster.

When asked what measures would be put in place to ensure another outbreak doesn't occur, Premier Gladys Berejiklian yesterday said she "can't make any assurances that this won't happen again".

"This is a very contagious disease, and I don't think any government in any place on the planet can give an assurance that outbreaks won't occur," Ms Berejiklian said.

"Sometimes the best laid plans, the best laid policies don't prevent these outbreaks from occurring, and we should accept that this is the norm until there's a vaccine." NSW Health has revealed it has "10 or 12" lines of inquiry into how the Avalon cluster started but still cannot pinpoint the source of the outbreak in the community.

"We may never find the exact source and the links, but what's most important is we are not missing unrecognised chains of transmission in the community currently," Dr Chant said.

Meanwhile, authorities announced that a Bondi case included in Saturday's numbers is likely a false positive, but further investigations were needed to confirm the person is COVID-free.

One case linked to the Rose of Australia Hotel in Erskineville and a household contact of that case will be included in Monday's numbers as they were reported after 8pm on Saturday.

The state yesterday also marked a milestone of having completed more than 4 million tests since the beginning of the pandemic yesterday. The figure includes almost 350,000 in the past week.