KANGAROOS coach Mal Meninga has urged the NRL to sell rugby league to the world as Craig Bellamy and Daly Cherry-Evans backed plans for a historic cross-code showdown against the All Blacks.

Meninga said that the COVID-19 crisis had provided the NRL with a silver lining because a Kangaroos-All Blacks contest could attract more than one billion viewers.

He has been aware of the All Blacks-Kangaroos proposal - dubbed "HISTORY" - for the past year and he first discussed the idea with former NRL boss Todd Greenberg.

Greenberg was a fan of the concept, believing Meninga's Kangaroos could leverage the All Blacks brand by promoting the NRL to the 120 countries around the world that play rugby union.

ARL Commission boss Peter V'landys received an initial offer on Monday and the commission is expected to make a decision in the next two weeks.

The NZR and NRL are weighing up multimillion--dollar offers to put to both -organisations and Meninga -believes the All Blacks-Kangaroos epic can take rugby league to a global audience.

"This game would take the Kangaroos to the world," Meninga (pictured) said. "Rugby league people know how great our athletes are in the NRL and this would give our game global recognition. I'm keen to make this happen.

"I would love to see the famous green-and-gold Kangaroos jumper playing against the All Blacks. Hopefully we can get the concept off the ground.

"The best from our game versus the best from the New Zealand game … let's do it." Mindful of the political ramifications, Meninga was sworn to secrecy on the deal. Last week, he carefully consulted Australian players on whether they would be interested in playing a one-off Test against New Zealand later this year.

What Kangaroos players weren't aware of is that the end-of-year Test Meninga proposed was against New Zealand's All Blacks.

Queensland Origin captain Daly Cherry-Evans said the prospect of taking on the All Blacks would be a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.

"Anything like that, where there's an opportunity to grow the game of rugby league and in particular at a time like now, I think it's a great idea," he said.

"It would be unreal, great to look back on and experience something like that." Storm super coach Craig Bellamy would relish seeing the NRL's elite stars going toe-to-toe with All Blacks players before a possible 50,000 sellout crowd at Suncorp Stadium.

"I'd love to watch that," he said. "I'm not quite sure how they're going to do that, how they decide what the rules are going to be.

"Whether they go 13 (players) or 15 or 14. So there are a few things to sort out there. I wouldn't like to be a rugby league player on the bottom of one of those mauls.

"Mal might need to get his players used to that and get ready for that because that would be an ugly place to be if you're not used to it." With the All Blacks likely to be prevented from travelling to the northern hemisphere, NZR chief executive Mark Robinson confirmed he had fielded a proposal to take on the Kangaroos. "It's one of many different scenarios in a unique year like this that we're considering," Robinson said.