FINANCE The way we source electricity long term needs to change, writes Lisa Hughes and Robyn Willis

Thousands of NSW households will face eye-watering energy bills this winter as the impact of COVID-19 sinks in.

Since the start of the pandemic, energy usage across the country has increased by 105 per cent, according to data from Natural Solar, Australia's largest installer of solar panels and batteries, with average daily energy consumption rocketing to 33.9kw, compared with 16.5kw at the same time last year.

As a result, household energy bills for the past quarter could more than double, with the average household paying $800, up from $406.75. Those households with higher than average power usage can expect bills of up to $1800 a quarter.

Natural Solar chief executive Chris Williams says during COVID-19, Australians got a taste of what it is like to work and study from home, which has created a generational shift in the way we use electricity.

"We envisage the trend for higher usage is going to continue, and while it may be at a lesser rate than during COVID-19, even a 30 or 40 per cent rise will have a significant impact on household bills," Williams says.

While most Australian families will be hit hard by the increases, he says there were some households set to make it through the "COVID Quarter" unscathed.

Homeowners using solar power, combined with batteries to store unused power, have less reliance on the grid and a greater chance of reducing or eliminating their electricity bills.

For Kripa Amour, who in January moved into a four-bedroom Smart townhome in the Essentia development at Norwest with her two teenagers, it was a relief knowing her electricity bill was completely covered.

"The developers had a deal to provide the solar so that we would have one year of electricity paid for us, which was a huge advantage," she says. "It means that when you turn the heater on at night, you don't have to think twice about it." Solar panels were already installed by Natural Solar when Kripa moved in, which saved her the hassle now - and will save her money later.

"It wasn't the turning point (in my decision to buy) but it was one of the things I liked about moving here," she says. "There is battery storage and we have an app so we can see how much we use." The pandemic, and subsequent isolation measures, have focused attention on her family's electricity use more than ever.

"It's the heating and the lighting that adds up - every moment we are using electricity," she says. "Having the solar panels is a huge advantage for us." With the increased frequency of natural disasters, such as the recent bushfires and floods, followed by the coronavirus pandemic, Williams says that there has been a general shift in people wanting self-sufficiency when it comes to powering their homes.

Improvements in technology had made power sources like solar and battery storage more affordable, with many saving money almost immediately.

"If the use of solar power reduces energy bills by even 10 per cent and bills rise by 3 or 4 per cent per annum, it makes absolute sense," Williams says.

Meanwhile, for those who have been affected by COVID-19, some energy companies are trying to help customers through the period of "bill shock".

Paul Duboudin, senior external affairs manager at Origin, said the energy company would be providing tailored support, including payment extensions, payment plans or referrals, for those customers affected by COVID-19.

"We have paused late payment fees and are not disconnecting or default-listing any customers in financial distress until at least July 31," he says.

More: naturalsolar.com.au; originenergycom.au

MONEY SAVERS * Turn appliances off at the power point when they are not in use. Standby power can cost you $100 a year.

* Install insulation in your ceilings and walls. Heating a fully insulated home can save you between 40 and 50 per cent compared with a noninsulated home. * Track your energy use with an app. You will see where you're using the most energy, so you can drive your costs down. Try Wattcost or Powerpal, which are both Aussie start-ups.