Latrell set to appeal $1000 police fine after Cleary home free

LATRELL Mitchell has discussed appealing his $1000 fine for breaching COVID-19 health restrictions after fellow NRL superstar Nathan Cleary was cleared of any illegality despite Tik Tok-ing on social media with five young women inside his Sydney home.

The Daily Telegraph can reveal friends of Mitchell have urged the South Sydney recruit to challenge his fine from NSW Police given, like Cleary, he was also on his own property when pictured breaching strict COVID-19 guidelines.

The move comes as Deputy Premier John Barilaro yesterday called for Cleary to be banned for CONTINUED PAGE 90 FROM BACK PAGE the rest of the season, arguing the Penrith No. 7 had "breached trust" by not revealing details of the infamous dance videos when initially interviewed by the NRL integrity unit.

A decision on what, if any, further punishment Cleary will receive is expected today.

Mitchell, meanwhile, was catapulted back into the headlines this week after video emerged of he and Melbourne flyer Josh Addo-Carr enjoying a camping weekend with mates on the expansive working cattle farm he owns at Caffreys Flat near Taree.

Apart from being fined $1000, the pair was also each hit with a NRL sanction of $50,000 (60 per cent suspended) and given one-match bans - also suspended - until the end of the season.

Cleary was fined $10,000 (60 per cent suspended) and also received the same suspended one-match ban after images emerged of him and five girls inside the home he shares with fellow Panther Tyrone May.

On Wednesday, Nepean police said Cleary would not be fined for breaching social-distancing rules as, the occupier of the house, it was not him but his visitors who broke the rules.

As Mitchell is also alleged to have not left his own property, albeit a sprawling farm, there have been discussions about him potentially appealing against the $1000 sanction.

While Souths coach Wayne Bennett rejected an interview request yesterday, it is understood questions have also been asked by some close to Mitchell about him being handed the same NRL punishment as close friend Addo-Carr.

In images uploaded to Instagram, the Storm flyer was pictured firing shotguns, riding motorbikes and generally enjoying what he later described as a cultural weekend with close friends and family.

Yet it was later revealed, the NSW Origin winger had already been warned twice in 11 days for violating COVID-19 restrictions before effectively catching himself out on what became strike three.

Twenty-two-year-old Mitchell is said to have spent much of the past few weeks training in isolation and working on his property.

As a result of the weekend, both men were also charged with firearms offences and will appear in Taree Local Court on August 4.

Cleary could still receive further punishment from the NRL after failing to disclose the TikTok videos in his first interview with the NRL Integrity Unit.

He has since been hauled into League Central for a second time. In his first grilling, he only addressed the original images that were posted online, saying he had no idea they were taken in the 10 minutes his visitors stayed before catching an Uber.

Despite the new footage, there is nothing to suggest the women stayed longer than Cleary had suggested.

The NRL is expected to deliver a verdict on what, if any, further punishment Cleary will receive today.In the days since the images were released, all three players have received heavyweight criticism from the likes of Kangaroos coach Mal Meninga, NSW coach Brad Fittler, NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian, Deputy Premier John Barilaro and commentator Phil Gould.