Our expert panel - Allen Cheng, professor of infectious diseases epidemiology School of Public Health and Preventive Medicine, Monash University, and chairman of the Advisory Committee for Vaccines and co-chair of the Australian Technical Group on Immunisation (ATAGI); Professor Terry Nolan, head of vaccine and immunisation research group Doherty Institute; and Professor Paul Offit, director of the Vaccine Education Centre and professor of paediatrics in the Division of Infectious Diseases at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, USA - fact check your vaccine questions with JANE HANSEN

"WILL THE VACCINES COVER""THE MUTANT STRAINS?

All viruses mutate over time and the UK strain and South African strain have posed new challenges, but experts believe all the vaccines offer some degree of protection against these new strains.

"The existing vaccines are not affected by most of the mutant strains that have occurred so far, with the exception of the South African origin variant known as B1.351. It is possible that vaccine protection may be less effective against mild disease if exposed to this variant, but we do not know yet if there is any reduction in more severe disease protection," Prof Nolan said.

"In any case, all manufacturers are already working on new versions of their vaccines that will be effective against the mutation variants."

WILL I STILL HAVE TO SOCIAL DISTANCE?

Social distancing has been an effective tool pre-vaccine, but for the time being, we will have to continue social distancing until we know if the vaccine prevents transmission or just prevents infection.

"Yes, we will have to keep social distancing, at least until we are confident that we have good population vaccine acceptance and herd immunity," Prof Nolan said. "If travelling to countries that do not have high vaccine acceptance, until it is better understood if our vaccinations also protect at high levels against asymptomatic transmission, we will have to accept that we may get the virus and possibly pass it on to someone else who is vulnerable and not vaccinated."

WHAT IF I HAVE ALLERGIES?

Some people with severe allergies have reacted to both the AstraZeneca and the Pfizer vaccines. There are now warnings for those with allergies.

Safety monitoring of the Pfizer vaccine detected 21 cases of anaphylaxis among the first 1.9 million doses administered. AstraZeneca's vaccine has been associated with 30 cases of anaphylaxis out of just over three million administered doses.

All patients recovered after adrenaline was administered. The Therapeutic Goods Administration advises people receiving the Pfizer vaccine to check with their doctor if they have had a severe allergic reaction or breathing problems after any other vaccine or after the first dose of the COVID vaccine.

For the Vaccine AstraZeneca vaccine it advises people check with their doctor if they have ever had a severe allergic reaction (anaphylaxis) after any other vaccine injection.

CAN I STILL TRAVEL INTERNATIONALLY IF I DON'T GET THE VACCINE? Australia's chief medical officer Professor Paul Kelly has said international border closures will be "one of the last things" to change after the COVID-19 vaccine rollout. Each country is likely to set their own rules for accepting international visitors who have been vaccinated.

CAN THE VACCINE STOP COVID?

It won't necessarily stop you getting the virus, and you may not know you have been infected because the vaccines reduce severe disease, Prof Nolan said.

"We are waiting to see more data whether the vaccine protects against getting the infection. The ideal is if you have been vaccinated you are not only protected from getting disease, but protected from giving the virus to someone else," Prof Nolan said.

THE VACCINE CAUSES FLU-LIKE ILLNESS, WHY?

A third of the participants in the Pfizer placebo group reported fatigue and headache, but this is similar to all other existing vaccines.

"I think there's good evidence that the vaccine does cause a sore arm (as pretty much all injections do) and a fever in some people, and this was more than the saline placebo in the Pfizer trial and similar to the meningococcal control in the AstraZeneca trial. When the vaccine gets rolled out, we would routinely warn people that they will probably not feel well the following day and may get a fever, and actually this is a sign that the immune system is responding appropriately," Prof Cheng said.

WILL I HAVE TO PAY FOR THE VACCINE?

All Australians will be offered a COVID-19 vaccine free of charge and doctors will bulk bill the consultation as well. The vaccine is not mandatory.

The first lot of doses in phase 1A will be offered to high-priority frontline workers in border protection, hospitals and aged-care homes. These vaccines will be rolled out through hospitals.

The next phase for the elderly and vulnerable will be rolled out through general practice.

Unlike other childhood vaccines, if you choose not to have a COVID-19 vaccine, government payments will not be affected.

CAN A VACCINATED PERSON SPREAD COVID TO THE UNVACCINATED OR VULNERABLE? This is possible because the vaccine is designed to stop you getting seriously ill. Prof Nolan says the vaccine won't necessarily stop you getting the virus, and you may not even know you are infected.

Less symptoms like sneezing, runny nose and coughing may reduce spread, but it is unknown whether the vaccinated will not spread asymptomatic disease. England's deputy chief medical officer Jonathan Van-Tam had previously said scientists "Do not yet know the impact of the vaccine on transmission" and that it was possible to contract the virus in the weeks after receiving the jab.

HOW CAN YOU GET A VAX APPOINTMENT?

Patients will be able to make a vaccine appointment by using the GP clinic's existing booking system either by phone, online or through a booking agency like Hotdoc.It will be up to individuals to work out when they are eligible for a COVID-19 jab and to make their own appointment. All approved COVID-19 vaccination clinics will be listed on Healthdirect's National Health Services Directory, including their contact details and their online booking services (if available). If a patient requires help in locating a suitable clinic they can contact the National Coronavirus Hotline 1800 020 080 for support.

www.health.gov.au/ for the latest information.

CAN THE PFIZER VACCINE CAUSE INFERTILITY?

Social media and anti-vax sites have spread this rumour and as usual, it is incorrect. The claim comes from a protein in the mRNA vaccines which is similar to a protein necessary for the formation of the placenta.

"There is no evidence and no credible biologic mechanism that supports this claim. The coronavirus spike protein is very different to the placental syncytin protein," Prof Nolan said.

Pregnant women were excluded from the initial trials, but pregnant women are more vulnerable to COVID-19 because pregnancy changes the immune system. Those who are older, overweight, and have pre-existing medical conditions such as hypertension and diabetes have an increased risk of developing severe COVID-19.

"Pregnant women should discuss this with their doctor as this is a complicated decision that needs to take into account individual circumstances," Prof Cheng said.

Some women did fall pregnant during the Pfizer trial, both in the control group who got the vaccine and in the placebo group.

"These vaccine trials excluded people who were pregnant, but when you study tens of thousands of people, some will get pregnant and there were about two dozen cases in the Pfizer trial. There were two cases of miscarriage during those trials but in both cases it was in the placebo group (did not get the vaccine)," Prof Offit said.

HOW LONG WILL THE VACCINE PROTECT ME?

It's too early to say how long the COVID-19 vaccines will last. All the research so far shows the vaccines protect against disease, hospitalisation and death, but for how long is still to be determined.

Prof Cheng said if the vaccines are as good as natural infection "it could be quite a long time".

"We've had this infection around for a year and we have not heard of too many reinfections and we are not seeing reinfection with these new variants," Prof Cheng said.

"How long does the immune system remain activated to protect you against infection and might another strain come along where the protection you have doesn't work against that strain? I'd say it lasts a year at least, but at this stage, it might be more." The influenza vaccine changes every year because influenza mutates quickly and we don't know if COVID-19 will do the same.

WHY HAS AUSTRALIA BEEN SLOW TO ROLL OUT VACCINES, BEHIND THE UK AND US? Australia was slower than other countries to sign contracts to buy doses of COVID-19 vaccines. This placed us further behind other countries in the vaccine supply queue. Some of the vaccines we invested in - the Queensland University vaccine - fell over. We are producing the AstraZeneca vaccine in Australia and it took time to reconfigure the manufacturing plant to do this. Our medical regulator was also slower to approve vaccines for use. It decided against approving the vaccines for emergency use because we had low case numbers and instead conducted a lengthy, full approval process.

"Other countries who are rolling out vaccine programs (faster) have generally used emergency-use authorisations," Prof Cheng said.

HOW IS THE SAFETY DATA LOOKING FROM OVERSEAS?

Close to 200 million doses have so far been administered and governments around the world are monitoring side effects.

"Right now, there is no clear safety signal problem. Right now, nothing has really emerged," Prof Offit said. "The problem with giving a vaccine to millions of people is the coronavirus vaccines are designed to prevent coronavirus infection, not everything else that happens in life," Prof Offit said. "US basketballer Hank Aaron passed away from a stroke two weeks after he got a vaccine. He had a stroke and died, and people are trying to make something of that but he was 86. Thank God, for now, there does not seem to be a safety issue and if there is one, we will know it," Prof Offit said.

CAN THE VACCINE CAUSE TRANSVERSE MYELITIS?

Transverse myelitis is a spinal inflammation and three participants in the AstraZeneca trial developed it. The incidence of transverse myelitis is one to four cases per million people and is associated with both viral and bacterial infections including herpes simplex, chickenpox, and syphilis. It is also associated with multiple sclerosis.

"There were two cases of transverse myelitis in the AstraZeneca vaccine arm and one in the control arm (who did not receive the COVID-19 vaccine). One of those who developed transverse myelitis who received the AstraZeneca vaccine had pre-existing condition multiple sclerosis which is one of the causes of transverse myelitis. One case of transverse myelitis was in the control arm not receiving the COVID-19 vaccine which suggests that there is an existing background rate of transverse myelitis that can happen at any time," Prof Cheng said.

WILL THE VACCINES CAUSE HERD IMMUNITY?

If the vaccines do end up preventing transmission, when enough of the population is immunised, it will create herd immunity, meaning there will be enough immunity in the population so that those individuals who are not immunised will end up being protected because the virus won't be circulating.

"That level has to be is probably two out of three people need to be immune before you see herd immunity," Prof Nolan said.

CAN THE MRNA VACCINES CHANGE YOUR DNA?

Another rumour is that the Pfizer mRNA vaccines can change your DNA but the vaccine simply gives the cells in the body the recipe to make the spike protein which will prime the immune system. It is biologically impossible to change your DNA. "The mRNA vaccines have nothing to do with DNA, the DNA makes RNA and that RNA goes into the cell's cytoplasm which is the part of the cell that makes protein. It has nothing to do with DNA," Prof Nolan said.

IS THE VACCINE LINKED TO BELL'S PALSY? Four people out of 44,000 in the Pfizer vaccine trial developed Bell's palsy. The condition occurs in the general population each year at a rate between one to four cases per 10,000 people, but with millions of doses now administered, new data is showing there is no higher risk. "In the US we've administered over 40 million doses, and pre-licensure there was a concern in the Pfizer trial that Bell's palsy was occurring at a greater rate than placebo group. But now that tens of millions of doses are out there, the latest data shows the incidence of Bell's palsy is not greater in the vaccinated group, compared to unvaccinated group," Prof Paul Offit said.