Labor on outer with workers IT appears that ex-Labor front bencher Joel Fitzgibbon has caused a bit of a stink in the Labor Party as they try to work out what they stand for (Labor to try to dig itself out of a hole, 17/11).

Their climate wish list is certainly at odds with their traditional origins, and many of their voters now question the veracity of the party.

It might serve Labor well if they tap Anthony Albanese on the shoulder and pass the remit onto someone like Joel Fitzgibbon, who can lead them in a more beneficial direction.

Because at present, having a Greens Party and a quasi Greens Party just doesn't cut the mustard.

Peter Cattlin, Freshwater

If workers who vote Labor feel they are being ignored or forgotten by the party, all they have to do is stop paying their union fees (Labor to try to dig itself out of a hole, 17/11) - that would be certain to get their attention.

Stop an income stream at your peril.

Barry Laurie, Tweed Heads

Payback for botched payment scheme The word "fiasco" has typically followed "Robodebt", and with good reason (Victims of robodebt win $1.2b in compo, 17/11.) For many, the scheme's attempt to ensure recipients of Centrelink benefits were not over-receiving payments sounds only reasonable.  But this was never a good policy and was poorly implemented as the article implies, calling it a "botched scheme". The government's decision to walk away from defending the scheme against a class action is because they know what everyone else knows - the scheme was basically unlawful.  "Overpayments" the government recovered based on a flawed income-averaging model, were "not lawful debts", according to the Department of Social Services. The only real question is: why did the government wait so long before deciding to settle the class action.

Dr Jack Dikian, Mosman

Taxpayers slugged again There's a double whammy in the Robodebt class action settlement. The feds or - or, more correctly, taxpayers - are coughing up $1.2 billion to pay back and compensate about 400,000 Australians illegally stung with welfare debts (Victims of robodebt win $1.2b in compo, 17/11).

Yet no ministers, or their advisers, have been held to account - especially as Robodebt caused untold stress and trauma for these hapless victims and their families. Not happy, Jan.

Steve Ngeow, Chatswood

Distress signal Just to clarify, the people on welfare who received benefits they were not entitled to sued because they didn't want to give it back, and will now be paid extra as compensation for their emotional distress (Victims of robodebt win $1.2b in compo, 17/11).  Over $1.2bn to people already on taxpayer money and many in public housing. It's amazing how some always know how to lawyer-up. We reap what we sow.

Kim Baker, Engadine

Sitting on Defence I can understand the veteran's mother being concerned about the appointment of a former Defence worker to the new position of National Commissioner for Defence and Veteran Suicide (Mum questions impartiality, 17/11).

I also have reservations about the appointment. To me this appointment is little more than a backside-covering and public relations exercise designed to make it look like something is being done on veterans' suicides but also to put a buffer between the government and the problem.

It seems every time we have a serious problem these days, the solution is to appoint a commissioner, along with a shed full of hangers-on, called staff. Very costly and to what effect?

John George, Terrigal

Border force The current situation where the premiers can justify imposing lockdowns and restrictions by merely saying they are acting on the advice of their chief health officers is not good enough and the public is entitled to know "exactly" why they are being imposed (NSW still open as SA fights outbreak, 17/11). Following the new cluster in South Australia, the immediate response by some premiers was to close their borders.

They did not provide any other justification for their decisions other than they were acting on the advice of health experts. Really?

The following is an extract from the World Health Organisation regarding their position on lockdowns: "Large-scale physical distancing measures and movement restrictions, often referred to as 'lockdowns', can slow COVID-19 transmission by limiting contact between people. However, these measures can have a profound negative impact on individuals, communities and societies by bringing social and economic life to a near stop." I'm not a health expert. However, from what I have read regarding the advice on border closures and lockdowns, supported by WHO's position, these measures should only be imposed as a last resort.

Bernard Thompson, Cowra

House sitting It was reported this week that a Vaucluse mansion sold at auction for more than $24 million, reported to be $10 million over the reserve price. The buyers were reportedly two young Chinese, aged 26 and 29.

These two young people also own a $10 million apartment atop the Swiss Hotel in the CBD.

I am somewhat confused because I was under the impression that high-priced real estate was under federal government control when it came to purchases made by overseas buyers. Particularly Chinese buyers.

There is a government spat over the banning of many of Australian exports by the Chinese Communist Party. Why are overseas buyers allowed to make these sorts of purchases?

David Griffiths, Wellington

Chewy on your boot I have made a promise to myself never to buy an Allen's (Nestle) product again (Redskins ripped as Chicos are now cheeky, 17/11). Why?  Well, apart from standing on a street corner and shouting the odds it is the only way I have of protesting about this ridiculous rebranding of products simply because the name may offend about one in every million or so people.  What kind of mindset Chris O'Donnell, Nestle general manager, confectionary, has in this regard is hard to imagine. Redskins, Chicos, Coon Cheese? Australians grew up with these names. Civil libertarians have changed the world so that now kids run wild in school (School under siege, 14/11) and a prison sentence is more like a home from home thanks to the Prisoners Action Groups. I'm an ex-Pommie and I now declare the word Pom to be offensive and I want something done about it!

Alex Hosking, Gold Coast

Briefly … At the completion of the State of Origin I plan to then use the Suncorp Stadium as a venue where all families and friends of those who have been denied access to the state to attend births, terminal illness and deaths can come together knowing they are protected from the dreaded virus. We have so much to be thankful for in the knowledge that Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk and her ever-present state health adviser can consecrate this facility - walking on water is their next feat.

Herbert Montaine, Tugun, Qld

* * * Despite all of their country's flaws, Americans still have the right to freely choose their president - unlike the poor Chinese community who just have to accept decisions from Communist Party leaders or pay a price which will never end in their favour.

Brad Probert, Woodlands

* * * The Nestle company has delivered on its promise to give new "woke" names to the popular Allen's lollies Redskins and Chicos after they were deemed offensive and inappropriate (Redskins ripped as Chicos are now cheeky, 17/11). I hope all of the hard-line change merchants are happy now after getting into quite a tizzy earlier in the year.

Peter Penglis, Kambah

HAVE YOUR SAYMAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001