DAMNING new information about the level of access provided by the Chinese government to WHO investigators has cast further doubt on the health body's early report into the origins of COVID-19, and is fuelling potential "conspiracy theories" about the virus that the government in Beijing has sought to squelch.

According to reports from members of the World Health Organisation's team, which last week completed a tightly controlled investigation in and around the disease's epicentre in Wuhan, Chinese -officials broke with protocol and refused to give investigators data on 174 COVID-19 cases from the early phase of the pandemic.

One of the scientists, Australian microbiologist Dominic Dwyer, told The Wall Street Journal: "They showed us a couple of examples, but that's not the same as doing all of them, which is standard epidemiological investigation." "So then, you know, the interpretation of that data becomes more limited from our point of view, although the other side might see it as being quite good," he said.

China's unwillingness to share raw data, say experts, means the job of figuring out precisely where COVID-19 originated, including whether it could have escaped accidentally during "gain-of-function" experiments at the controversial Wuhan Institute of Virology, becomes that much harder.

"Key to discovering the origins of COVID-19 is to find Patient Zero, the first human to be infected with COVID-19 virus," Flinders University vaccine developer Nikolai Petrovsky said. "The mystery is why would China seek to withhold such vital information from the committee.

"Sometimes the data you cannot obtain says more than the data you can. China withholding such important information from the panel only helps fuel the impression they have something to hide." A spokesman for federal Health Minister Greg Hunt said the government was waiting for the WHO's final report before passing judgment. "These are very complex and detailed studies which are yet to be completed, and we appreciate the efforts of the scientific experts leading this work in difficult circumstances," he said.