THE NRL was left red-faced last night after Broncos stars Darius Boyd and Jack Bird were exposed defying social distancing rules as Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk ticked off on the season's return.

Boyd and Bird were filmed having lunch together in New Farm Park only hours before Palaszczuk declared Queensland's borders would open to the NRL on the proviso the game did not pose a threat to the state's quest to beat COVID-19.

The NRL was plunged into crisis this week when Origin players Latrell Mitchell, Josh Addo-Carr and Nathan Cleary were busted breaking isolation protocols. Palaszczuk backed the NRL's May 28 season kick-off, but warned ARLC chairman Peter V'landys that Queensland would withdraw its support if the NRL threatened the state's encouraging results.

"I said I was as keen as anyone else to see the NRL return and I meant it," she said. "The only condition was that it did not put our excellent work containing the spread of COVID-19 at risk and the Chief Health Officer advises that the NRL plan is workable." V'landys guaranteed the players would follow strict biosecurity rules and adhere to government guidelines.

"We won't let the Queensland Premier down," V'landys said.

"The players will be given our full biosecurity plan in the coming days and with the education they will be given, I have faith in them to follow the rules. I'm sure the players realise they cannot stuff up again and the repercussions if they do." Just hours later, the NRL was forced to deal with the Broncos issue, a spokesman telling The Saturday Telegraph the game was seeking further information on the matter.

With restrictions easing from Saturday in Queensland, it is unlikely Boyd and Bird will be sanctioned for their park meet-up, but the timing couldn't have been worse with the NRL needing to stay squeaky clean in the coming months.

The Broncos claimed Boyd had been supporting Bird, who is still on crutches as he recovers from a season-ending knee reconstruction.

"Darius Boyd has been meeting with Jack Bird to provide mentoring and support after Jack suffered another season-ending knee injury," the Broncos said."Jack has undergone reconstructive surgery on the knee, the second time on the same knee in the past 12 months, and has been encouraged by the club to meet regularly with Darius."