PAUL McGregor and Dean Pay are not the only two NRL coaches under extreme pressure.

The word out of the Shire is that John Morris desperately needed last night's vastly improved effort to ease pressure.

It hasn't helped losing Bronson Xerri and Josh Morris, but their terrible performance against the Wests Tigers last week raised questions about the coach's future.

Your columnist keeps hearing Cronulla wants Shane Flanagan back once he's cleared by the NRL.

That could be as early as next season now that Todd Greenberg is out of the game and with Peter V'landys prepared to revisit his case.

Whoever is in charge, the Sharks are facing a couple of years of pain until their inconsistent big names come off contract and they can bring in fresh faces.

Costly move to fullback LATRELL Mitchell is in danger of costing himself $90,000 by playing fullback at the South Sydney Rabbitohs.

That's his match payments for playing for NSW against the Maroons in State of Origin, which has been pushed back this year because of COVID-19 to November 4, 11 and 18.

Latrell is no hope of playing fullback ahead of James Tedesco or Tom Trbojevic. However, it's a different story if he is playing his best football in the centres.

Trbojevic and Jack Wighton played centre last year after Latrell was dropped, but Wighton could easily be switched to five-eighth if necessary.

The money is important to Latrell in a season where he has already lost $100,000 by rejecting the Roosters' $800,000 offer, to take $700,000 at the Rabbitohs.

Bennett blame game IT'S interesting Anthony Seibold is copping all the blame for the disarray at the Brisbane Broncos. This is not entirely fair.

People seem to have forgotten who actually assembled this team and put Anthony Milford on $1 million, Jack Bird on $900,000 and Darius Boyd on $800,000.

His name is Wayne Bennett.

The Broncos have slumped to the two worst losses in history in their past five games.

The scoreline has been 93-6 against them in the past two weeks. This is not the first time Bennett has left a club on its knees. Think Newcastle and his departure in 2014 and the wooden spoons in 2015, 2016 and 2017.