Nine axes state cups WE have been critical in recent times of Channel 9's lack of commitment to rugby league - and here is another reason why.

The free-to-air network has abandoned its coverage of state cup football in NSW and Queensland in their recently renegotiated broadcast deal.

The Canterbury Cup and Intrust Super Cup are important pathway competitions to the NRL, in which clubs rely on sponsorship they can generate from the TV exposure.

The competitions have been abandoned this year because of COVID-19 but Nine has pulled out for the final two years of their contract in 2021 and 2022, blaming production costs.

Fox Sports will still cover the NSW comp. To save production costs, Canterbury Cup games could be scheduled as curtain-raisers to Fox League games where cameras and outside broadcast teams are already set up.

The QRL and the NRL are looking to set up a live-streaming service to ensure fans can stay tuned to their competition.

Dog off the leash THE Bulldogs' best player - lock Adam Elliott - is attracting interest from rival clubs, with his contract expiring at the end of the season.

And he is likely to delay a decision until he knows if Dean Pay will be coaching.

Elliott's partner Robyn recently gave birth to their first child and the 25-year-old is looking to set himself up with a long-term deal and a pay rise to justify the enormous improvement in his game.

"The Bulldogs have said they are about to put an offer to us," Elliott's manager David Riolo said. "He's happy there to a point but he'd like to see the roster improve.

"They've got some money but it depends how they plan to spend it."

Hunt v Gal confirmed THE much-anticipated Paul Gallen fight with UFC warrior Mark Hunt is back on again.

Both fighters have signed contracts and promoter Matt Rose is now waiting to lock in a venue for September. Qudos Arena at Sydney Olympic Park is the likely location.

Hunt will start a hot favourite with bookmakers to beat the old Sharks and Blues Origin legend over six three-minute rounds.

"I'll give him credit, he was a tough footballer," Hunt said. "But I don't think he knows what he has got himself into - it's not State of Origin. I punch people in the face for a living!

"I've been keeping myself in condition during the corona shutdown and as soon as we have a date, I'm ready to go. "And he's not gonna know what hit him once he feels my power."