Dams are full so why the limits?

It appears that La Nina may be rearing her head again with the Bureau of Meteorology stating that if it occurs, the Hawkesbury Nepean area could be subject to serious flooding, thus affecting many new suburbs in Sydney's northwest (La Nina's reign poses flood threat for west, 25/8).

This will of course be exacerbated by the fact that Warragamba Dam is full to overflowing and we have little further storage infrastructure to help mitigate La Nina's effect.

If this is correct, why then do we still have water restrictions in place and why is Sydney Water, in expensive advertising, telling us to conserve water?

Our politicians and water bureaucrats need to come to grips with this. Peter Cattlin, Freshwater

Fire recommendations have to be implemented Yes Anna Caldwell, the independent inquiry into the bushfires has made 76 recommendations and they have been accepted by the NSW government (Green tape torched, 25/8).

Less green tape, hazard burns when property is at risk, aerial firefighting with water bombing planes to be the first - not last - response must be a great idea and trials of grazing in national parks are just a few of the key points.

Everything must be done by all sides to ensure we never see another devastating fire season like we saw just a few months ago. Twenty five lives lost, including six firefighters, almost six million hectares and nearly 2500 homes destroyed is a terrible outcome and one that should never happen again.

Marg Swindells, Castle Hill

Green tape warning So the NSW government is going to adopt all 76 recommendations from the bushfire royal commission (Green tape torched, 25/8).

Come on, you would have to be very dense if you think for one minute that the green bureaucrats, public servants and council officers are going to allow a single tree to be cleared around someone's home.

They will put in place insurmountable obstacles that will never be overcome. Joe Richards, Harrington

Wonderful memories There are so many wonderful stories about European immigrants who came to Australia to work on the Snowy Hydro-Electric Scheme (Snowy 2.0 a family affair, 25/8).

Leaving their countries of origin to work hard in a climate similar to where they grew up, we owe them our gratitude.

My two "zios" (Italian uncles) arrived in 1927 to work as cooks at the Burrinjuck Dam, which is part of the early hydro-electric scheme.

So proud is Mr Salvestro to see his granddaughter Bella following in his footsteps to work on Hydro 2.0. Obviously she has the work ethic of her "Nonno".

Gloria Velleley, Belrose Awake to woke

Dr Kevin Donnelly was right to lament the rise of covert political activism within Australian classrooms at the expense of educational standards, which have inevitably been in free fall in recent years (Where woke comes from, 25/8).

The woke warriors, like all committed leftists, have an almost-demented obsession with breaking down social structure and championing identity politics, which views daily life through the prisms of race, sex and gender.

As he affirms, the social engineering forays of frustrated neo-Marxist and Green-Left teachers have largely succeeded, as they have viewed schools as bastions of potential civil change, due to the presence of thousands of young, malleable minds.

As Donnelly notes, due to the influence of Brazilian Marxist Paulo Freire's concept of critical literacy, the current teaching of English in many progressive schools is now no longer about the formal rules of grammar, written expression and clear thinking. Instead, students are instructed how to deconstruct and critique texts in terms of power relationships. Thus, a new generation of woke activists is awakened to the supposed horrendous evils of white settlement and Western culture.

Peter Waterhouse, Craigieburn, Vic

Religious undertones I think Nick Cave recently referred to this insidious and randomly violent covert Marxist insurgency as "bad religion" (Where woke comes from, 25/8).

The irony of course is stunning, being that a major front to this cultural revolution is our ABC and SBS, where popular culture has been hijacked as they attempt to lure in all the cool kids in the quadrangle with music shows such as Rage and popular quiz segments.

Of course the scoffing South Park-style goths at the ABC have claimed Nick Cave as their own but he's having none of it. He's way too adult for these indoctrinated "Children of the Corn".

Robert Brown, Davistown

Why the silence?

It is refreshing to read Andrew Bolt's comments on hydroxychloroquine and the importance of zinc in both protecting against and treating early stage COVID-19 (Coronavirus but where's the zinc?, 23/8).

Since the beginning of this pandemic I have been advocating for the use of vitamins C, D and zinc. I have done so based on my clinical knowledge from more than four decades working in nutritional health, but also encouraged by research into COVID-19 being conducted around the world.

This suggests zinc has enormous potential, and in conjunction with hydroxychloroquine can significantly improve patient outcomes. Studies also show Vitamin D provides important immunity benefits against COVID-19, both defending against infection and reducing severity of symptoms.  Intravenous vitamin C is being used overseas to treat the cytokine "storm". There are both political and commercial reasons why these largely safe and easily available treatments are being ignored, but very few therapeutic ones.

It is frustrating not to see more leadership on this issue. Speaking out is not a pathway to popularity, but it may help save lives.

Professor Ian Brighthope, Brighton, Vic

Poor perception The problem with aged care is not a matter of government funding, nor is it an issue of a shortage of trained professionals. It's that aged care isn't a respected form of nursing.  Working in aged care is often regarded as a form of babysitting.  Until this perception changes, aged care will always play second fiddle to the kind of nursing that occurs in hospitals.

Ashley Bell, Harris Park

The walking blind As we know, driving a vehicle while using a mobile phone is illegal.  Many times we see pedestrians crossing the road, visually glued to their phone and blindly expecting motorists to get out of their way.  Surely if pedestrians choose to cross or use any public road, they should be legally bound to the same rules regarding mobile phones as motorists and subject to the same penalties as drivers.

Jan Partington, Wahroonga

Briefly ...

Border closures may destroy jobs and cripple the economy, but I am sure they save lives as well.

Kathe Fraser, Bellevue Hill * * * Congratulations go to Tim Blair for his article (Bias from hat to feet, 24/8) reminding us of the embarrassing attempt by ABC presenters Lisa Miller and Michael Rowlands to put a leftist spin on a school student's actions in Washington last year. Spin and ooga booga belong in the same bin.

Rob Jones, Panania * * * We have turned into a nation of whingers.

We are fortunate to be living in the best country in the world. We are confronted with a problem at the moment not of our doing and we will fight to the end. The government is doing its best in an unprecedented event. So here is my whinge - stop whinging.

Jack Jackson, Burleigh Heads

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001