Former Tiger still friend but Benji disputes Matto's claim

BENJI Marshall insists he holds no ill will towards Ryan Matterson but the Kiwi veteran is adamant the -Tigers do have what it takes to -contend for the premiership.

Matterson walked out on the Tigers to join the Eels at the end of last season and on Thursday he will face his former club for the first time in a Western Sydney blockbuster.

His exit was reportedly fuelled by his belief the Tigers could not win a grand final but Marshall, the only -active player from the club's 2005 premiership victory, thinks the team is building towards that kind of success.

"I think we can win," Marshall said. "There's something building at this club that is showing me signs that something is there.

"You have to have that belief. If you don't, you might as well not be here. I feel like there's a belief within - that no one will come out and say publicly - that we can win.

"You have to have that mentality to compete at the top and to win. "In rugby league, players come and go but the club remains strong. Whether I'm here or not, the club remains and the fans are rock-solid.

"I love Ryan, but whether he's here or not doesn't dictate what sort of club we are." Matterson, 25, starred for the Tigers last year and nearly made his Origin debut for NSW, but he asked for a release to link up with the Eels.

His good form has continued this year and he has played a major part in Parramatta's rise to the top four.

The Tigers, fresh off a 48-0 win over Brisbane, are in seventh but have not beaten a top-eight team this year.

Marshall said he wasn't certain of the exact reasons for Matterson's departure but denied there was bad blood between the backrower and his former teammates.

"I think he's been portrayed differently to what he's actually like," Marshall said. "He's one of the nicest, most caring guys I've ever met.

"I encourage young guys, when they are going through stuff or making decisions, it can't be about what's best for everyone else, it has to suit you.

"I don't know the full situation with Ryan but he felt that was the best thing for him. You can't be angry with anyone for that.

"Matto's a great player, I thought he was one of our best players last year, and I was -gutted to lose him.

"But on the other side of the coin, in rugby league you have a short amount of time to play the game and I thought he did what he thought was best for his career, and you can't hold that against anyone.

"Even though he's not here, I'm still friends with him. Of course I would have loved him to stay." Marshall, 35, will take on Parramatta in a rich vein of form after he scored a try and set up three more in the win over the Broncos.

It was his first start since round four after he was dropped by coach Michael Maguire, and he said he was more confident in his abilities than ever before because of the time he spent on the sidelines.

"What Madge is doing is building a consistency in the way you prepare and the way you train, and you do that every week on the field," Marshall said. "Sure, he's made some tough calls, but in our team you can see some of the habits building.

"I copped the brunt of it and that's fine, but I got to go back and look at the things I needed to improve and on the weekend I'd never felt more confident about my game because of the things I'd changed." Star hooker Harry Grant missed Monday's training session as he awaited the results of a COVID-19 test. Grant took the test on Sunday after moving house.