CRONULLA had the last laugh over Valentine Holmes after the Sharks produced a 26-16 boilover to sink the Cowboys in Townsville last night.

The Sharks took a bite out of North Queensland's NRL title -credentials and recorded their first win of the season in an end-to-end contest at Queensland Country Bank Stadium.

Holmes had little impact in his first match against the club he walked out on in 2018 to pursue a career in the NFL. After blitzing the Titans last week, Holmes registered only 91m, no line breaks, made three errors and failed to create a try as the Sharks got revenge on the Queensland Origin star following his -controversial exit from The Shire.

The Cowboys thrashed the Titans a week ago but lacked punch without their chief destroyer Jason Taumalolo (knee) while Coen Hess (ankle) was a late withdrawal and John Asiata suffered a knee injury in the first half.

Despite making 17 errors and completing at only 60 per cent, the Cowboys had 53 per cent possession but still struggled to crack Cronulla's defence.

In the absence of Taumalolo, middle forwards Josh McGuire (169m) and Frank Molo (145m) were shining lights for the error-riddled Cowboys. It was Cronulla's right edge that did the damage for the Sharks with young guns Jesse Ramien and Ronaldo Mulitalo terrorising the Cowboys all night.

In only his 12th NRL game, -Mulitalo proved he is a genuine Queensland Origin bolter with a two-try haul while Ramien also bagged a double to upstage the Cowboys. The Sharks got on the board first through Ramien but it was some poor Cronulla defence which allowed Cowboys winger Kyle Feldt to level scores after 26 minutes.

The visitors went into the break with a 12-6 lead after Mulitalo pounced on a deft kick from Shaun Johnson. Mulitalo was caught napping early in the second half, allowing a determined Justin O'Neill to score, but atoned with a sensational finish to give the Sharks a 16-10 buffer.

When Ramien punished the Cowboys with a 95m effort in the 53rd minute, the Sharks looked home. But Cronulla let the Cowboys back into the contest almost immediately with an error allowing Feldt to bag his second.

Mulitalo was in the thick of the action again, soaring over rival winger Ben Hampton to put Briton Nikora over for the match-winner.

The Cowboys will get a chance to bounce back when they face the battling Warriors on the Central Coast next Friday.

Meantime, Cronulla had to overcome a major drama before the game with six players failing initial temperature tests.

The group, including five-eighth Matt Moylan, all recorded temperatures in excess of the 37.2C limit set as part of NRL biosecurity protocols.

Fortunately for the winless Sharks, team officials have confirmed the players all passed a -subsequent test and have been cleared to play against the Cowboys at Queensland Country Bank -Stadium.

It's not the first time the temperature regulations have disrupted a team's pre- game preparation since the league resumed following the COVID-19 shutdown. Brisbane halfback Brodie Croft had to pass a secondary test before last week's clash with Parramatta while Sydney Roosters had a similar drama before their clash with the Broncos at Suncorp -Stadium on Thursday.

Brett Morris, Kyle Flanagan and Joey Manu all failed their first tests upon arriving at the stadium before passing a secondary test to get the all-clear to play.

Superstar fullback James Tedesco didn't even make the trip to Brisbane after waking with a high temperature, with Roosters officials deciding to leave him in Sydney.

SHARKS 26 COWBOYS 16 CRONULLA Tries: R Mulitalo 2 J Ramien 2 B Nikora Goals: S Johnson 3 NORTH QUEENSLAND Tries: K Feldt 2 J O'Neill Goals: V Holmes 2