THE coronavirus that has become a worldwide pandemic may have been created in a "cell-culture experiment" in a laboratory, according to prominent scientists who have conducted groundbreaking research into the origins of the virus.

Flinders University -Professor Nikolai Petrovsky has completed a scientific study, currently undergoing peer review, in conjunction with Latrobe University in Victoria, which found COVID-19 was uniquely adapted for transmission to humans, far more than any other animal, including bats.

"It was like it was -designed to infect humans," he said.

Professor Petrovsky, from the College of Medicine and Public Health at Flinders University, who has spent the past 20 years developing vaccines against pandemic influenza, ebola and animal SARS, said this highly unusual finding left open the possibility that the virus leaked from a laboratory.

"The two possibilities which I think are both still open is that it was a chance transmission of a virus from an as yet unidentified animal to human. The other possibility is that it was an accidental release of the virus from a laboratory," he said. "Certainly we can't exclude the possibility that this came from a laboratory experiment rather than from an animal. They are both open possibilities." Prof Petrovsky, who is chairman and research director of Vaccine Pty Ltd, said COVID-19 had genetic elements similar to bat coronaviruses as well as other coronaviruses.

The way coronavirus enters human cells is by binding to a protein on the surface of lung cells called ACE2. The study showed the virus bound more tightly to human-ACE2 than to any of the other animals they tested.

"One of the possibilities is that an animal host was infected by two coronaviruses at the same time and COVID-19 is the progeny of that -interaction between the two viruses.

"The same process can happen in a petri-dish. If you have cells in culture and you have human cells in that culture which the viruses are infecting, then if there are two viruses in that dish, they can swap genetic information and you can accidentally or deliberately create a whole third new virus out of that system.

"In other words COVID-19 could have been created from that recombination event in an animal host or it could have occurred in a cell-culture experiment." Scientists worldwide have, to date, overwhelmingly said the virus more likely originated in a wet-market and was not created in a laboratory.

Asked why scientists have had this view, Professor Petrovsky said scientists "try not to be political" and do not want their research impacted adversely by tighter laboratory controls.

Prof Petrovsky was originally modelling the virus in January to prepare a vaccine candidate. He then turned his attention to "explore what animal species might have been -involved in the transmission to humans" to understand the origins of the virus - and had a "surprising" -result when none were well-adapted.

"We found that the COVID-19 virus was particularly well-adapted to bind to human cells and that was far superior to its ability to bind to the cells of any other animal species, which is quite unusual because typically when a virus is well-adapted to an animal and then it by chance crosses to a human, typically, you would expect it to have lower-binding to human cells than to the original host animal.

"We found the opposite so that was a big surprise," he said. The study, a collaboration between Flinders University and Latrobe University, titled "In Silico comparison of spike protein-ACE2 binding affinities across species; significance for the possible origin of SARS-CoV-2 virus", is awaiting peer-review.