THE World Health Organisation has found it "impossible" to trace the origins of COVID-19 despite a 28-day investigation in Wuhan, dismissing suggestions it was leaked from a lab or crossed to humans at a seafood market.

The team handed down their findings at a press conference in Wuhan late yesterday, after a month of meetings and site visits in the Chinese city where the virus was first identified in December 2019.

WHO scientists, appearing alongside their Chinese counterparts, said the most likely possibility was that the virus spilled over from an animal into humans. Frozen food was also being probed as a potential source.

Peter Ben Embarek, the head of the WHO mission, said: "The laboratory incident hypothesis is extremely unlikely to explain the introduction of the virus into the human population." Dr Embarek said the WHO investigation had uncovered new information but had not dramatically changed the picture of the outbreak.

Professor Liang Wannian, who heads the Chinese team of experts, ruled out the Huanan Seafood Market as an origin source.

"While some of the early cases had an association with the Huanan seafood market, others were associated with another market and some no market at all," Prof Liang said.

He said the team believed the virus originated in animals - likely bats or pangolins - but the intermediate hosts that allowed it to jump to humans are "yet to be identified".

Prof Liang said minks and cats were also potential virus reservoirs but he said there was "not adequate enough" research proving this.

He also said no bats in the wild in China had been found to be carrying viruses that may have mutated into COVID-19.

The virus could have been circulating in other regions before it was identified in the central Chinese city of Wuhan at the end of 2019, he said.

The WHO team agreed with his assessment, with Dr Embarek adding: "We can also agree we have found evidence of wider circulation in December not just cluster outbreak in market, also circulated outside market."

KEY FINDINGS ■ Lab theory 'extremely unlikely'

■ Huanan Seafood Market unlikely to be original source of outbreak

■ Frozen food is being probed as a potential carrier of the virus ■ Study points to virus originating in bats - but it is unlikely they were in Wuhan