If you liked… THE THICK OF IT Try… FLACK STREAMING, FOXTEL NOW 7.30PM, MONDAY, FOX ONE THE final episode of season two of this brilliantly wicked drama drops this week, and I'll be sorry to see it go. Fans of this series, who found the heady mix of celebrity scandal and deeply dysfunctional people paid to cover for them intoxicating, will have to wait to see if this is going to a season three (possibly on Amazon Prime, which picked Flack up after Viacom incomprehensively dropped it a week before season two started). Besides the strong performance by lead Anna Paquin, the highlight so far this season has been the addition of Sam Neill, who found a match on screen with Sophie Okonedo as Paquin's boss, Caroline. His character, Duncan, was suitably shocking, boasting he'd "once snorted a gram of cocaine off Kylie Minogue's bottom and then rode a Shetland pony into a swimming pool". It's a scene Neill thought would end up on the cutting room floor, telling one UK paper: "Kylie's a friend of mine, and I thought she wouldn't mind, but perhaps she'll take terrible exception to it. Still, she does have a famously good bottom. I was worried they'd cut it out." - Holly Byrnes

DRAMA THE SINNER: JAMIE STREAMING, NETFLIX DETECTIVE Harry Ambrose (Bill Pullman, pictured) returns for season three of this brilliant crime anthology, which sets him a whole new mystery to solve. The new episodes star Matt Bomer as Jamie Burns, an expectant father and Dorchester resident who seeks Harry's support after a fatal car accident in Upstate New York reveals a much larger and more disturbing case behind it. Bomer is bone-chillingly good. - HB

KIDS ODD SQUAD 4.30PM, SUNDAY, ABC ME IF, like me, you are mathematically challenged, it might be an idea to make a date to watch this clever live action series, which sees a crack squad of spies investigate strange happenings in their town. The child actors use mathematical concepts (addition, multiplication, using data in graphs, etc.) to advance each episode's plot; but it also parodies the police procedural. Smart and educational. - HB

FACTUAL BACK ROADS 8PM, MONDAY, ABCABC News Breakfast co-host Lisa Millar, the happy force behind the show's rejuvenated ratings, turns her beaming smile on country Australia and presenting this week's episode of Back Roads. This week we -find ourselves in Rokewood, a tiny town in rural Victoria. Millar (pictured) takes a look at how a community comes together when the heart of the town is unable to beat. A COVID-19 special that will warm your heart. - HB

If you liked… THE AMERICANS Try… PERRY MASON STREAMING, FOXTEL NOW 11AM AND 8.30PM, MONDAY, FOX SHOWCASE BRACE for a grim start to this dark and moody remake of the 1950s classic legal drama, reimagined with The Americans star Matthew Rhys in the role played famously by Raymond Burr. I can't say too much as HBO are keeping the plot twists under wraps, only adding to the suspense of this series; but the light and shade in the first episode was clever and kept tight. Set in 1932 Los Angeles, the series will focus on the origin story of famed defence lawyer Perry Mason, based on characters from Erle Stanley Gardner's novels. Living pay-cheque-to-pay-cheque as a low-rent private investigator, Mason is haunted by his wartime experiences in France and is suffering the effects of a broken marriage. LA is booming while the rest of the country struggles through the Great Depression - but a kidnapping gone very wrong leads to Mason exposing a fractured city as he uncovers the truth of the crime. Rhys doesn't carry the intensity of Burr's performance, but folding under the brim of his fedora hat, he certainly looks the part. - Holly Byrnes

COMEDY WHAT WE DO IN THE SHADOWS STREAMING, FOXTEL NOW 8.30PM, THURSDAY, FOX SHOWCASE SEASON two of this hilarious show returns this week (with a third confirmed for 2021). Our vampire housemates Nandor (Kayvan Novak, pictured), Nadja (Natasia Demetriou), Laszlo (Matt Berry) and "energy vampire" Colin Robinson (Mark Proksch) all return to document their nightly exploits as they navigate the modern world of Staten Island. Based on the feature film of the same name by JoJo Rabbit's Taika Waititi and Flight of the Conchords' Jermaine Clement. - HB

FACTUAL WHO DO YOU THINK YOU ARE?

7.30PM, TUESDAY, SBS WE fell deeply in love with her crazy character in O-ffspring and more recently as the equally dysfunctional lawyer in 10's returning drama Five Bedrooms. But what will we find in her family's closet as Kat Stewart (pictured) goes searching for geneaologicial secrets? Her stable and loving upbringing instilled in her a strong sense of ethics and it's with this belief that she goes on her ancestral journey, seeking characters who were both principled and just a little bit colourful. - HB

REALITY BOTCHED STREAMING, FOXTEL NOW 7.30PM, TUESDAY, FOXTEL E! I CAN'T be the only one who's taken a deeper interest in this series since the rise of the Zoom meeting, where every wrinkle and double chin seems to be magnified on screen, tenfold. The good news is there are new episodes to binge from Tuesday. Dr Terry Dubrow and Dr Paul Nassif (both pictured) should brace for a rush of new patients, all desperate for a WFH (work from home) nip and tuck. - HB