THE cancellation of this year's historic Kangaroo tour of England has made me contemplate my future as Australia's head coach and set a goal of playing a Test match this year.

The three-match tour scheduled for October-November was something I was enormously excited about.

Being able to lead Australia on its first Kangaroo tour since 2003 was something I wanted to achieve after being appointed coach in 2016 and pushed hard to make happen, with the backing of the NRL and support from -international bodies.

It's understandable why the tour had to be cancelled on the back of COVID-19 and the disruption to the NRL premiership, but it is still disappointing. I am determined to make it happen and the earliest that could be possible is at the end of 2022.

I am contracted to coach the Kangaroos until the completion of next year's World Cup in England, but the cancellation of this year's tour has made me think about what I want to achieve in the role. If a Kangaroo tour for 2022 is possible, I would love to be part of it.

Being part of four Kangaroo tours (1982, 1986, 1990 and 1994) as a player is one of my greatest achievements and provided some of the fondest memories of my -career. The Kangaroo tour was the ultimate for a player at that time. There was so much tradition and esteem in being selected.

They were rugby league's version of the Olympics and to be part of a select group was fantastic. The camaraderie was something I cherished. A group of 26 went away, with most barely knowing each other, and returned best mates. We built lifelong bonds. I want the current group of Kangaroos to experience that and bring the special feeling back to international rugby league.

The cancellation of this year's tour means it is also unknown when we will play our next Test match. The Kangaroos' last outing was against Tonga at Eden Park in New Zealand last November. We lost 16-12 and while it was a historic night for Tonga, beating Australia for the first time, the defeat stung the Kangaroos.

Having looked at the new 2020 calendar, there could be an opportunity to play one Test match after the State of Origin series.

The last Origin game will be played on November 18 and there is a window to play a Test on home soil around November 27-29 against New Zealand or Tonga.

It would be the perfect way to wrap up what has been a torrid year for many reasons, but also a season that has -galvanised the game.

The Kangaroos team would be picked following the State of Origin series and be the icing on the cake. The players would all be on leave by December and have a decent break before reporting for pre-season training ahead of 2021.