JAMES Roberts came very close to walking away from rugby league after a horror year in which he struggled on and off the field as injuries, bubbles and negativity took control of his life.

The speedster played just six games for South Sydney last year before his season was cut short when he ruptured a pec against Newcastle.

However, it was his career that looked to have ended prematurely when he and the Rabbitohs agreed to part ways on compassionate grounds in November, fuelling fears we had seen the last of "Jimmy The Jet" in the NRL.

Roberts found life hard last year when COVID-19 and injury took their toll on him and his young family, forcing himself to check in to a rehabilitation clinic for help.

"I was thinking of throwing it all in and just getting away from rugby league, the media and all the negative stuff and all the pressures and just focus on my family to live a normal life," he said.

"Luckily I had some time away and I found that hunger again. I found a good balance with my family and I'm just enjoying everything.

"I just sort of got everything with my family in order and then had a long think about it. And I realised I really do love the game and it's my dream to do what I do.

"I thought I would just give it another crack and just enjoy it more instead of making it my job. Just enjoy coming to training and laughing with the boys. So that's where I'm at." While some clubs may have shied away from signing a player with his track record, the Wests Tigers showed faith in a young man who is desperate to return to his best on the field and is feeling mentally stronger than he has in years at his new home.

"I can't remember the last time (I've been in such a good head space), maybe in 2018 at the Broncos," he said after scoring a try in his side's 52-18 trial win over the Sea Eagles.

"I've got a clear head and I'm just enjoying my footy and my life outside of footy, and you know there's a lot to look forward to at the club.

"It's been quite enjoyable. I've sort of changed my whole mindset. Starting over and just being grateful for my job and the opportunity that I have, and I'm just enjoying my footy.

"I'm not worrying about the pressures and that outside noise. I'm just doing what I know I'm capable of and just enjoying my day-to-day life as well outside of footy.

"I've spent a lot of time with my family and just come to training and it was a good, good group of boys here and a lot of young boys. We're just shaping the culture to the way we want it to be in the future." Roberts made his State of Origin debut for the Blues in 2018 but among the flashes of brilliance have been plenty of setbacks, leading him to part ways with four clubs before landing at Leichhardt.

Michael Maguire, who coached him at the Rabbitohs in 2012, will be on hand to help Roberts every step of the way.

"He's been really good," Roberts said. "Over the years we've had our differences. I was a lot younger and a lot wilder. I had a few things going on. My priorities weren't in order.

"Now I'm in a good mind frame and it's good to work with him and try and excel my game on and off the field and help the young lads and try to get to my peak footy again. He's been really supportive of me and helped me a lot. And so is the club as well, so I'm really thankful for that.

"I feel very comfy and we're changing the culture and it's good to be part of it. It's good to just feed off the young boys and show them the way as well. There are good times ahead."

ALL THE NRL ACTION kayosport.com.au