For any negotiations to be successful, a certain amount of trust must be held between the -involved parties. This is one reason why discussions -between Australia and China are so fraught. The Chinese government argues from such an absurd position that it verges on comedy.

China's Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying provided a perfect example of Chinese negotiation lunacy during a press conference this week.

"China always speaks out loud and clear and upholds justice when it comes to violations of human conscience and international fairness and justice," Hua insisted.

This is ridiculous. It is a matter of record that China conceals from its own citizens the details of atrocities such as the massacre in Tiananmen Square.

Likewise, the number of prisoners executed by China every year is a state secret.

In that light, China's opportunistic attacks on Australia over war crimes violations -appear to be no more than an -attempted distraction.

Hua called on media to "not only zoom in their lenses on human rights issues in China", but to also examine "human rights violations committed in some western countries".

No violations in western countries come anywhere near the levels of abuse that are -officially sanctioned by China's ruling communist dictatorship.

The world knows this. The Chinese dictatorship knows this. But the Chinese people, shielded by state media, do not.

Incredibly, following China's oppression of its minority Muslim Uyghur population, Hua claimed "China enjoys trad-itional friendship with the Islamic world" and is "protecting the rights of Muslim believers".

Unfortunately, no Uyghurs were available for comment due to them being held in "voluntary education and training camps".

"China has been open, transparent and responsible in origin tracing," Hua continued, add-ressing China's handling of the coronavirus crisis.

"We are among the first countries to co-operate with the World Health Organisation." That co-operation was closer to a conspiracy. The WHO's -initial response to COVID-19 was to praise Beijing, the source of significant WHO funding. The Chinese dictatorship makes it very difficult to -advance negotiations. Sadly, that may long be the case.