Supply and demand forcing prices up - and hurting household budgets PRICES paid by consumers for most household items have climbed this year despite COVID-19 causing Australia's biggest economic downturn since the Great Depression.

While sharp falls in fuel and childcare costs have provided some relief, a Sunday Mail analysis of detailed Australian Bureau of Statistics data has found prices have risen in two-thirds of product categories.

Household appliances, textiles and tobacco costs have surged more than 8 per cent, while almost all grocery prices are higher - led by an 8 per cent jump in vegetables.

The Consumer Price Index was identical in the 2020 September quarter to 2019's -December quarter, after --re-cov-ering from a sharp fall -between April and June.

The ABS, which monitors inflation in more than 120 different categories of goods and services, says there have been significant price rises this year in beef, drinks, jams and garden tools. That has been offset by falling prices for childcare, petrol, transport and utilities.

Economists say the coronavirus has changed the supply-and-demand forces for many products. Prices rise when consumers want more of something or when it's difficult for retailers to source it.

PwC chief economist Jeremy Thorpe said people's -behaviours had changed during the pandemic.

"We know that people are cooking more at home, buying raw ingredients," he said. "People have improved their homes and spent money on things in their home." While the ABS data shows electricity, gas and water prices have dropped, Mr Thorpe said usage had surged.

"People have been working from home and seeing very large increases in energy bills," he said. "Even as the price has fallen, they are using more of it and have had a bit of a shock when they have seen their power bills." MyBudget director Tam-my Barton said she had seen an increase in household budgeting and bargain hunting, with some people using government stimulus payments to buy appliances.

"We have also seen an -increase in online food shopping where clients have been able to search for specific specials and discounts," she said.  Ms Barton said MyBudget had seen an 11 per cent jump in utility bills in 2020 as people worked from home.

"Some key utility providers such as Origin Energy have announced reductions to assist their customers," she said.

Rising utility bills were offset by falling costs in carparking, travel and work-related expenses, Ms Barton said.

Prices of clothing, footwear and accessories are down, with Australian Retailers Association chief executive Paul Zahra saying the working-from-home trend was resulting in lower demand.

"There are less events and outings and people are nesting," he said. "These trends have been present all year and will continue until we find a new normal, particularly as far as events and working life are concerned.

"People don't need to dress up, so they're wearing casual outfits." KPMG chief economist Brendan Rynne said there had been price rises in imported goods where COVID-19 had affected the supply of products "even though demand has decreased a little because people have lost jobs and wages".

COVID PRICES GOING UP Major appliances 10.2% Household textiles 9.2% Tobacco 8.1% Vegetables 8% Small appliances 6.3% Beef and veal 5% Jams and honey 4.6% Water, juice, soft drinks 4.2% Lamb and goat 4.1% Garden tools 3.6%

GOING DOWN Childcare -25% Fuel -17% Transport fares -5% Men's shoes -4.3% Preschool, primary school -4.2% Domestic travel -3.6% Water -3.3% Communications equipment -2.3% Electricity -1.8% Clothing accessories -1.8% Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics, December quarter 2019 to September quarter 2020