IMF LOOKING AT 'MORE DIRE SCENARIOS'

THE Australian share market has suffered its biggest sell-off in six months as it finally yields to fears intensive efforts to contain the coronavirus outbreak are failing.

And the Aussie dollar is plumbing fresh 11-year lows against the greenback, caught in the rip as investors grow increasingly wary about the outlook for the global economy.

In its worst session since August, the benchmark ASX 200 shed 2.3 per cent yesterday, cutting $48.3 billion from the value of companies in the index. It fell heavily at the open - quickly exceeding the 0.7 per cent slide signalled by futures markets - and lost more ground later in the session.

It marked an abrupt change of gear for the market, which had broadly been rising throughout February despite mounting fears authorities were struggling to stop the spread of the virus.

The fall yesterday came after one of the world's leading economic bodies, the International Monetary Fund, warned it would be "prudent" to prepare for a significant fallout from the Covid-19 outbreak. In a statement, IMF managing director Kristalina Georgieva said the outbreak was a global health emergency, had disrupted economic activity and could put a recovery in global growth at risk.

"Above all, this is a human tragedy, but it also has negative economic impact," Ms Georgieva said.

Even if the virus were rapidly contained, growth in China and the rest of the world "would be impacted", she said.

"Of course, we all hope for a V-shaped, rapid recovery - but given the uncertainty, it would be prudent to prepare for more adverse scenarios." Last month, the IMF forecast the global economy would grow 3.3 per cent this year, up from 2.9 per cent last year.

Ms Georgieva said the IMF now expected the outbreak to cut China's rate of growth this year from a projected 6 per cent to 5.6 per cent - in turn cutting about 0.1 percentage points from global growth.

"But we are also looking at more dire scenarios where the spread of the virus continues for longer and more globally, and the growth consequences are more protracted," she said.

In a separate report, Moody's Analytics said efforts by Chinese authorities to curtail the spread were without precedent.

Moody's analysts warned "prolonged factory closures in addition to the closure of major transport linkages are a significant blight on normal manufacturing operations".

"Until the virus is contained and the number of infected patients stops rising, the toll on manufacturers and the broader economy will continue to rise," they said.

In developments at the weekend, South Korean President Moon Jae-in said he was putting his country on its highest alert for infectious diseases, ordering officials to take "unprecedented, powerful" steps to fight an outbreak there.

In Italy, authorities battled to contain Europe's first major outbreak. There were also some virus clusters with no direct links to China, where authorities were struggling to trace the origins.

In Australia, companies including shopping centre owner Vicinity Centres, casino group Crown Resorts and theme park operator Village Roadshow have warned the virus outbreak is taking a toll as tourist numbers slide.

Others to warn of an impact yesterday included BlueScope Steel. Reporting a 70 per cent drop in first-half net profit on the back of weaker steel prices, BlueScope warned the virus outbreak would "heavily impact" its Chinese business.

Earlier in the day, the Aussie dollar hit a fresh 11-year low against the greenback, at US65.85c. It was March 2009, in the thick of the financial crisis, when it last traded at such depths against the US dollar.

peter.taylor@news.com.auwith AP, AAP