BUNNINGS customers are urged to be on alert for symptoms after a staff member at a Campbelltown store tested positive to COVID-19.

The employee reportedly wore a mask and practised social distancing on three shifts this week at Bunnings on the corner of Kellicar Rd and Bugden Place.

NSW Health is asking any customers who visited the store to monitor for symptoms and if they do become even slightly unwell to self-isolate and get tested.

The employee worked on August 4 from 11am-7pm, August 5 from 8am-4pm and August 6 from 1pm-3pm.

Staff members who came into contact with the employee have been identified and are self-isolating.

Bunnings said in a statement last night the employee "is a close contact of a family member who tested positive and was self-isolating at home when they received the positive result.

Masks have been compulsory for staff at southwest Sydney stores including Campbelltown since July 25, Bunnings said, and for all of NSW staff since August 3.

A schoolgirl from Our Lady of Mercy College has also tested positive, prompting the school to close for a deep clean of the campus.

NSW Health is currently conducting contact tracing with the school's assistance. Yesterday saw the reopening of one of Sydney's hippest markets but social distancing and masks weren't on th-e menu.

"The stalls were still pretty close together and there were a lot of people hanging around; it's hardly the sort of get-in-and-out style shopping experience that you see at the supermarkets," one visitor to the markets said.

"There were some stallholders without masks." A female shopper said: "I'd say about half the people are wearing masks and social distancing seemed OK." On its website Carriageworks said it was limiting numbers to 350 people as well as banning both BYO coffee cups and tastings.

On Saturday the state recorded its lowest COVID-19 statistics in over two weeks, with nine infections in the 24 hours to 8pm on Friday.

It's the first time NSW cases have dipped below double figures since July 24, when seven were -recorded.

One of the new cases is a student of Tangara School for Girls in Cherrybrook in Sydney's northwest, which has also been closed for cleaning and tracing.

The origin of that and two other infections remain a mystery to NSW Health. Australian Medical Association NSW president Dr Danielle McMullen said she was "more concerned now than I have been at any other time during this pandemic because we do have cases of community transmission and we don't know where all of them are coming from".