ZIMBABWEANS tend not to be rugby league fans but when Queensland coach Brad Thorn described his team's defence against the Melbourne Rebels as "Originesque", the man responsible for it, Michael Todd, fully understood he was being highly praised.

Thorn, despite having won the 2011 World Cup with the All Blacks, doesn't have a whole lot of history with Australian rugby.

So when asked to compare the Reds' Super Rugby AU display against the Rebels - when they made 143 tackles to nine in the second half against Melbourne but didn't concede a point - all Thorn could do was to liken it to the defence of the great Queensland State of Origin teams he once played with during his years in league.

"You can't describe it except saying 'Queenslander'," said Thorn, reviving Billy Moore's history-making exhortation to the Maroons as they filed down the tunnel as underdogs for a 1995 Origin match.

Todd has been to a State of Origin match and knew the history of the rivalry. So he was well aware Thorn was doling out his highest praise.

But Todd, who migrated to Australia in 2009 after two years earlier having represented Zimbabwe at rugby's Junior World Cup in Ireland, never expected to find his name being spoken so reverently.

When the COVID-19 pandemic struck, Todd found himself answering an SOS from Thorn to take over the defence coaching role.

"It's been a pleasant experience but a steep learning curve," Todd said. "I wouldn't say we are doing too much different. We have just tried to simplify it. We know it is going to be a short tournament so we just try to do all the simple things really well, as well as play for each other." JULIAN LINDEN' SUPER RUGBY AU TEAM OF THE WEEK 15. Jack Maddocks (Waratahs), 14. James Ramm (Waratahs), 13. Kyle Godwin (Western Force), 12. Hamish Stewart (Reds), 11. Filipo Daugunu (Reds), 10. James O'Connor (Reds), 9. Jake Gordon (Waratahs), 8. Brynard Stander (Western Force), 7. Michael Hooper (Waratahs), 6. Liam Wright (Reds), 5. Lukhan Salakaia-Loto (Reds), 4. Matt Philip (Rebels), 3. Pone Fa'amausili (Rebels), 2. Tom Horton (Waratahs), 1. Cameron Orr (Rebels).