Energy & water key to bush prosperity Warren Mundine's commentary regarding The Daily Telegraph's 2020 Bush Summit is a vision that many, many Australians have (Not just a coastal nation, 28/8).

We have for too long listened to the green left and those bureaucrats with similar ideologies, who have stagnated our country.

Water management, energy production, regional growth and land management are key to our development as our population increases.

Hopefully, the Prime Minister and the LNP Coalition are listening and reading because Mr Mundine has summed it up in four columns of print.

Peter Cattlin, Freshwater.

"" " Warren Mundine's great recommendations shows his knowledge and understanding of the bush.

He is spot on - Australia needs action planning and vision to bring energy, water, and support to regional areas, so the bush and all the nation can thrive.

Sure there were some mistakes made in our reaction to COVID-19 virus, but we will learn from these. To hasten economic and social recovery, it would be great if politicians put personality clashes aside, as well as unnecessary red tape, ideology, and power tug of wars, and worked together in the national interest.

Twenty five million Australians are asking for strength in leadership, insight and new ideas. Mr Mundine is correct - open up the bush with water and energy innovations.

R. Brown, Ballina

United vision can beat the ideological divide I applaud The Daily Telegraph Bush Summit and couldn't agree more with Anna Caldwell (Fighting for the bush, 28/8).

It is indeed impressive that an alliance of farming, agricultural and conservation groups "seems to put any divisive green versus brown politics to one side and comes together for practical outcomes that support farmers, bush residents and the environment".

We all need to look after the world we live in and not let ideology get in the way. More of it.

Tom Hunt, The Oaks

Help for heroes a priority Giving veterans a dedicated advocate to tackle high suicide rates is surely an idea whose time has come, if not even overdue, given the 500 veterans' suicides since 2001 (Dedicated power to probe vet suicides, 28/8).

Fingers crossed, the creation of a National Commissioner for Defence and Veteran Suicide Prevention, following The Daily Telegraph's Save Our Heroes campaign, will provide families affected by a defence member or veteran suicide with the necessary independent and professional support.

Steve Ngeow, Chatswood

WHOse side are they on?

Anyone would have to be naive to think that the World Health Organisation would investigate the coronavirus pandemic situation thoroughly (Wuhan gets free pass, 28/8).

US President Donald Trump woke up to these clowns very early, and so should our Prime Minister and our politicians now.

I'm of the opinion WHO are an organisation sympathetic to China and one we can't afford and don't need.

Erwin Vitnell, Bathurst "" " The World Health Organisation team that went to China to check out the origin of COVID-19 spent three weeks in Beijing. Not once did they visit Wuhan, understood to be where the virus started (Wuhan gets free pass, 28/8).

This can only lend weight to the view that the WHO marches to the beat of China's drum.

Alan Heatley, Elanora Heights

Coaches are the scapegoats This really is so very unfair you know. These poor coaches of NRL teams getting sacked for their teams' lack of performance and position on the league ladder (Seibold denies player revolt, 27/8).

It's the players that are on the field and playing so badly - why not sack them and start the team anew?

It's not as if the coaches grabbed the ball and ran up and down the field and failed to gain any points.

They gave the team the instructions and advice at the start of the game, but it's the players that just ignored it and carried on losing.

My sympathies go out to the poor coaches who are sacked needlessly for their teams' poor performance on the field.

Diana McCarty, Emu Plains

Island isolation needed It is time to face up to the fact that we either close the international border or properly enforce quarantine (Sleazy security and army refusal in quarantine inquiry, 28/8).

It is obvious the term "security guard" has been completely overstated because they appear unqualified for the role and city hotels are unsuited for a pandemic quarantine.

Christmas Island is the place for returning travellers where we can be assured they are COVID free after quarantine and are able to return to the community without fear of spreading infection.

Otherwise we will be continually chasing our tail with constant and random outbreaks.

Gary Bryant, Gladesville

Multi-tasking lesson for Dan Victorian Premier Dan Andrews has stated: "If the PM has time to be doing those things, that's fine for him, I don't." Perhaps a theatrical understanding of multi-tasking would better equip him to competently manage his state.

Our PM Scott Morrison does many things collectively and well. Mr Andrews seems to be having a problem doing the one thing he is obviously focused on, not so well.

R.M. Max, Shoal Bay

Beware the underdog As this has been the week of the Republican Convention in America, perhaps it is opportune to briefly assess US President Donald Trump (Battle lines drawn, 28/8).

He is blamed for many things but, love him or hate him, prior to COVID-19, America was in reasonable shape. Unemployment was down, jobs were on the increase with the share market and business confidence on the rise.

It appears that one of his party's catchcries will be law and order which could be a winner for him particularly with the current prevalence of violent demonstrations.

While the election is still some time away, the betting agencies certainly have him as the underdog.

Is it possible, however, that another minor miracle may occur and he out-Trumps them all. Again Darryl Tutton, Wollstonecraft

Drug slur a diversion tactic Donald Trump continues to debase American political discourse by suggesting Democrat challenger Joe Biden may have taken performance enhancing drugs (Battle lines drawn, 28/08).

And credit to your reporter to point out that he offered no evidence. This is how political journalism should be conducted.

For months Trump has been convincing himself Biden is senile and incoherent. Now that the Democrat challenger had a successful convention, he must be taking drugs.

In Trump's mind, only he gets to be the winner, and everyone else must be cheating. Like most of Trump's outrageous suggestions, it is a projection of his own anxiety and a diversion tactic.

Han Yang, North Turramurra

Briefly ...

It's an ill wind that doesn't blow some good. And so it is with the coronavirus. Schoolies Week on the Gold Coast has been cancelled on health grounds - how good is that. This excuse for teen drunkenness, drug taking and loutish behaviour is something we can all do without.

John George, Terrigal

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001