Teaching in schools of hard knocks In reference to The Saturday Telegraph's story on school violence, here are some other examples of behaviour encountered by teachers (School under siege, 14/11).

A female school principal gets punched in the face, calls police, student is arrested and taken away in handcuffs.

A pregnant teacher is pushed to the ground by a female student. When the mother is called in to discuss the girl's suspension, she says "well she didn't push her very hard".

A small female teacher tries to break up a fight between two large girls and gets squashed. She is rescued by a boy (one of many watching). When two male colleagues were asked why they didn't intervene, they said the girls would probably accuse them of inappropriate sexual touching.

I could go on with many more examples. These are just recent ones that happened to members of my own family.

Name withheld, NSW "" " In the 1950s and '60s this behaviour seldom occurred and I suggest the Education Department should go back in time and find out why.

Teachers were held in high esteem and kids would never have behaved in the way that is occurring in classrooms now.

It is high time drastic action was taken otherwise the kids are going to walk right over teachers. I am sorry teachers have to put up with this.

New directives should come from principals and the education department; it should never have been left to come this far.

It is no use leaving these sort of kids in the classroom to disrupt everybody else and hope it goes away.

J.A. Jones, Tea Gardens

An Origin win won't wipe Queensland's COVID sins The political pointscoring that Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk is attempting to achieve is simply dumbfounding (Border deal still an open question, 14/11).

Her current closed border to the majority of NSW's population smacks of a Machiavellian plot, not to mention the serious harm it's had on many people both sides of the border.

Funnily enough though, come State of Origin on Wednesday they've reviewed their gathering rules to allow full capacity at Suncorp Stadium, albeit they're restricting NSW-based supporter or commentary participation, unless isolation is taken.

Clearly Palaszczuk and her mouthpiece, chief health officer Dr Jeannette Young, have little regard for the damage they have done, and regardless of the result of Wednesday night's Origin game, Queenslanders should hang their heads in shame.

Peter Cattlin, Freshwater "" " If the Queensland government is not prepared to allow the Channel 9 commentary team of Ray Warren and others into the state for the third State of Origin, Peter V'landys and the NRL should move the game back to Sydney from Brisbane (Rabs not welcome among 50,000 rabid Queenslanders, 14/11).

See what Annastacia's reaction would be then. There is absolutely no COVID-19 or medical reason why the commentary team could not travel up and back on the day.

Paul Purcell, Soldiers Point

Slow, steady and ... safe As people complain about borders still being closed and being deprived of a sense of normality, let's not forget COVID-19 is still with us.

Looking at the northern hemisphere, which has suffered a resurgence of cases higher than that of earlier in the year, with lockdowns again being considered, we need to not let our guard down.

Victoria has shown us what can happen if poor contract tracing and insufficient testing occurs.

Even with a vaccine on the horizon promising a 90 per cent success rate, that means 2.5 million Australians could still be susceptible to getting it.

Even now testing sewage water has found traces of coronavirus and people are urged to get tested.

People that are asymptomatic, that could be carriers and spreaders without knowing it, are naively walking among us.

Our new habits of social distancing, wearing masks, hand washing for 20 seconds, using hand sanitiser and limiting numbers at venues could be with us for the foreseeable future.

There is an old saying: "Slow and steady wins the race." Let's be careful and take things a step at a time.

Joe Kovac, Prestons

Timely intervention An army of nurses sent in to heal schools is a sound, commonsense strategy indeed (Nurse army to the rescue, 15/11).

Teachers need to focus on teaching kids and these nurses will be the essential frontliners to treat and refer pupils with mental health and medical issues.

Experts stress that helping vulnerable kids at a critical early stage greatly helps to reduce their chances of them transitioning to mentally troubled adults.

Something about "a stitch in time saves nine".

Steve Ngeow, Chatswood

Fighting back on trade China has broken our "free trade agreement" by banning some of our first-class imports, therefore I propose we ban all Chinese imports (China's new slap to Australia, 14/11).

We may have to rough it for a while as everything has the label "made in China" these days.

But, who can forget those first-rate "whitegoods" Australia used to produce that never broke down or our clothing "made in Australia" that never wore out, just went out of fashion. Come on Aussie, come on.

Janice Russell, Malua Bay

Slow to realise peril Commenting on MP Joel Fitzgibbon's exit from Labor's front bench, Anna Caldwell gets it right when she says the shortsighted criticism of him by people like Mark Dreyfus and other left MPs will only further "alienate potential Labor voters who happen to agree with Fitzgibbon" (Labor throwing Fitz, 13/11).

While these left-wingers are quick to shoot off their mouth, they're a bit slow on the uptake.

Tom, Killarney Vale

Tone it down, Donald How much more conclusive evidence do Donald Trump and his obsessed supporters want after senior US federal and state officials released a statement saying there was "no evidence" that votes were lost or changed, or voting systems corrupted, and that the election turned out to be the most secure in American history.

Donald Trump's massive ego is getting in the way of him accepting defeat and his rhetoric continues to inflame tensions (MAGA march rocks US - Online, 15/11).

Unfortunately for Americans the next few months will be chaotic until Joe Biden's inauguration.

History will judge Trump very harshly if he doesn't put the country first and accept that he lost the election fair and square.

Warren Cato, Manyana

Trump just returning fire For the past four years America's Democrats have done everything in their power to demonise and destroy Donald Trump.

Now he is giving them a hell of a hard time by declaring election fraud and refusing to concede defeat and these hypocritical, unapologetic, underhanded leftists can't stand it.

What you give out in life is what you get back.

David Ingram, Randwick

Briefly ...

Nah - not a chance - that Wayne Bennett guy, he couldn't possibly have another ace up his sleeve, could he? Or could he? I get a tiny bit wary when he gives that lopsided grin - maybe it's because his eyes ain't smiling (Origin 2020, 15/11).

Rosemary O'Brien, Ashfield "" " With the constant stream of failed relationships on reality romance shows it's nice to see Anna Heinrich and Tim Robards, who have been together since 2013, welcome daughter Elle into the world ('Bloody amazing!': Bachelor baby is now a reality, 15/11). Congratulations.

Marg Swindells, Castle Hill

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001