IN a decisive move against Beijing sympathisers in his own ranks, Anthony Albanese has vowed any future government he leads will shun China's Belt and Road Initiative.

It comes as the health minister said revelations a prominent Australian scientist believes it was possible the coronavirus was created in a Wuhan lab is "precisely why" an independent inquiry into the virus' origins is needed.

Labor remains wracked with division on China, with Mr Albanese moving to distance himself from the controversial Belt and Road Initiative, while his agriculture spokesman Joel Fitzgibbon defended his claim the Morrison government was "demonising" Beijing.

However, the Opposition leader yesterday refused to criticise Victorian premier Daniel Andrews for last year signing a deal with Beijing.

"A government I led would not be signing up to the Belt and Road Initiative," he said.

The controversial initiative is Beijing's strategic vehicle for investment in dozens of countries around the world.

Mr Albanese said the federal government had no grounds to criticise Mr Andrews given their past selling the Port of Darwin.

Mr Fitzgibbon continued his assault on Scott Morrison.

"All I've been doing is standing up for the national interest and Australian jobs," Mr Fitzgibbon told Sky News.

"It was just unnecessary for our prime minister to run out ahead of everyone else … if you're going to have an inquiry anyway, and we were always going to do just that, why use such intemperate language against your largest trading partner?" Nationals senator Bridget McKenzie said Mr Fitzgibbon needed to clarify if he was on Australia's side.

"Joel needs to get on board Team Australia or is he backing other Labor entities such as Daniel Andrews by putting the Chinese interest above Australia's," she said.

It came as Mr Hunt revealed Australian officials are already working with the World Health Organisation to get an independent COVID-19 inquiry started, insisting it was up to "disease detectives" to determine the origin of the deadly virus. The Daily Telegraph yesterday revealed that prominent scientist, Flinders University's Professor Nikolai Petrovsky, believes it should be "considered a possibility" the virus escaped from the Wuhan Institute of Virology.