GOVT HELP THERE'S now talk of the NRL pushing the state government for a boutique stadium at Liverpool on a site owned by Canterbury. It could be used for Canterbury and Wests Tigers games. The Dogs' Belmore HQ is unlikely to get funding and the club's deal is up at ANZ Stadium.

PICK PROP WE'VE been pushing the case for Roosters forward Lindsay Collins to play Origin this year, not that we should be helping out Kevin Walters with his Maroons selections.

On Friday night against the Broncos, Collins made an extraordinary 240m in just 55 minutes.

HAPLESS BULLDOGS TAKE A REAL KICKING THE Bulldogs are on the verge of imploding.

The team's winless start to the year, no major sponsor, no home ground, uncertainty over the future of coach Dean Pay, the standing down of club legend Steve Price and the unexplained return of Chris Anderson in an unofficial recruitment role has upset long-time fans.

Anderson stood down from the Bulldogs board last year when The Sunday Telegraph revealed his recruitment business had gone into liquidation, owing millions.

He was replaced on the club retention committee by his wife, Lynne Anderson, but player agents have revealed he's still unofficially involved behind the scenes - although the club denies this.

Meanwhile, Pay feels he's being sidelined from roster planning. The Dogs have a $3 million war chest to spend on new players for 2021. There is one major problem - potential recruits want to know who will be coaching the team.

This will force the club into making an early call on Pay, possibly even next week.

The other big issue concerns football club general manager Price, who was stood down when COVID-19 shut down the premiership, but has yet to return from Queensland.

The club surprisingly left him out of their 50-person bubble. Many blame the fact club legend Terry Lamb got caught at training last week shaking hands with players and breaking biosecurity protocols on the fact Price wasn't around to police the strict rules.

MITCH'S MUCH BETTER HALF MITCHELL Pearce is aiming to jam a wedding into the busiest year of his life. With the finals and Origin pushed back until late November, the Knights skipper and fiancee Kristin Scott have chosen a date in the week between Christmas and New Year.

They will tie the knot at Byron Bay and hope to invite 150 guests, but it will depend on the COVID-19 restrictions.

Blocker Roach's son, Liam, will be best man and the guest list will include Todd Carney, Boyd Cordner, Kalyn Ponga, Anthony Minichiello, David Gyngell and Nick Politis, plus his closest mates from Newcastle.

WHEEL DEAL MOST of the NRL's senior executives are about to go car hunting. The closure of Holden and their long-term sponsorship of the game means vehicles have to be handed back over the next few weeks. We're sure Roosters boss and automotive tycoon Nick Politis would love to help them out.