A massive deficit for the future Circumstances are a little more serious than the GFC but still, the spending of the Morrison government makes former Prime Minister Kevin Rudd's much criticised handouts look miserly. Indeed, some handouts have been so long- standing and generous that many recipients stood down from work prefer not to return, even though employers need workers to come back.

Workers and taxpayers who are obliged to pay back this debt in 10 years ahead might look differently on this so-called heroic spending.

Brian Whybrow, Wanniassa, ACT

The Treasurer will soon unveil Australia's largest budget deficit since World War II.

I find this funny. The Government can still control and reduce the size of deficit by not spending too much. For starters, just reduce the too generous JobKeeper payment.

Mokhles Sidden, Strathfield

Words of wisdom from former PM Great wisdom from Tony Abbott (Actually, all lives matter, 23/7): "If you don't understand the things that have shaped the culture in which you live, it's very hard to navigate properly." BLM protesters lay claim to superior moral virtue, but many weep false tears, perhaps offending their own moral sensibilities.  They pay little attention to past choices, have little knowledge of Australian history, and march for Western civilisation nihilism.

It's important to examine the past and present achievements of Aboriginal Australians.

They are well respected and have equality.

Ron Brown, Ballina

Leaners and lifters The article by Jessica McSweeney that relates to JobKeeper keeping tourist towns afloat, is an interesting one (Coronavirus NSW: Areas with the highest JobKeeper rates, 23/7).

On a trip last week, I was in both Byron Bay and Coffs Harbour. I had dinner at two relatively large venues in both towns and was amazed that virtually all of the wait staff were Europeans, not Australians Both managers told me, in no unspecific terms, that their usual staff were on $750 a week, $1500 a fortnight and did not want to work.

Both said they expect them to float back when JobSeeker finishes, and both said in so many words "no way José, they've let me down badly".

Such is the state of play in two of the largest NSW coastal towns and, no doubt, this plays out all over Australia. Best draw your own conclusions about JobSeeker creating a new class of leaners not lifters John Partridge, Manly

Flight of fancy End of an era (Boeing, Boeing, Gone: No more Sydney from a 747, 22/7). No mention of the 747 SP (special performance) variant which must have been struck from the inventory years ago.

I had many flights on the shortened "pocket rocket" and pilots fondly regarded it as a hot dog, or a "stubby puppy". Time travels fast.

It was over 60 years ago when Qantas phased in the new 707.

Mike Fogarty, Weston, AC

Viral outcome With regard to the planned Black Lives Matter protests next week, it is time every state government showed how fair dinkum they are in protecting all of us from the coronavirus.

There should be fines and jail terms for the organisers.

If they don't then there truly is one rule for some and another for the rest of us.

Peter Wilcox, Blayney

Not a viable option I question the financial benefits of proceeding with the Narrabri gas project (Gas project debate dominated by lots of hot air, 23/7).  Investing further in gas is a risky economic move when fossil fuel investments globally are not doing well; in the past fortnight, Origin Energy and Santos have both announced billion-dollar write-offs due to collapse in global gas prices.

Moreover, the Australian Energy Market Operator and CSIRO have already determined that solar and wind are the cheapest forms of new generation and when paired with storage solutions like pumped hydro are already price competitive with gas. Why opt for a solution that will endanger our aquifers, spoil productive agricultural land and is an emissions nightmare?

Gas simply costs too much for potentially so little gain. .

Jasper Lee, Ashfield

Cheap power for China Those planning our post-COVID-19 world must consider the Chinese coal boom that sees 250 gigawatts of additional coal-fired power plants either under construction or planned.

This will lift Chinese coal consumption to more than four times that of India where large increases are also planned.

Coal is still king in much of Asia, where governments obviously understand that CO2 plays a minor part at best in climate change and they can burn coal with impunity without threatening their future.

A cynic might conclude that having shut down industry in much of the world with a virus originating in their country, the Chinese now plan to gain the advantage with cheap power unacceptable to much of the gullible west. We should not let this happen here.

Doug Hurst, Chapman, ACT

Panda-monium I think the only person rubbing his hands with glee at the pandemic his country caused is Xi Jinping. The world is in economic decline, people are dying in the thousands, the US is in disarray and there are massive job losses. If you didn't know better, you would think this was some kind of master plan orchestrated by China to swallow up smaller countries indebted to the Communist rule.

The smiling Panda couldn't be that clever, could he?

Janice Russell, Malua Bay

Cooking with gas We read Mr Zinn's (Gas project debate dominated by lots of hot air, 23/7) with interest.

We've been gas stove users ourselves. For a long time, we resisted change because we loved cooking with gas for its instant heat.  We finally made the switch to an electric cooktop when we learnt about the respiratory (health) impacts and air pollution created from using gas.

The induction cooktop is much easier to keep clean and turns out to be just as responsive as gas. As we have solar panels and were able to disconnect the gas, the savings on our household bills has been immense.

To all those gas connected homes in NSW, we would encourage you to switch away from gas for the sake of your health, time and budget, if not for the environment.

Tom and Evelyn Hunt, Oak Flats

Briefly ...

What a fitting final tribute, to fly the kangaroo on radar by the last Qantas 747 en route to the US (That's a real roo route, 23/7). Just as well it wasn't that stupid wattle emblem; it would be unrecognisable, in every sense of the word.

David Goon Pan, Cronulla * * * The fight against the dire COVID-19 is all encompassing. Hence, the flip side to Victorian Premier Dan Andrews plays the blame game (Editorial 23/7) is the sound observation that 'any time you're busy fixing blame, you're wasting time and energy and not fixing the problem'.

Steve Ngeow, Chatswood * * * You can get it chanting, you can get it marching, you can get it taking a knee. As a matter of fact, BLM ... you're flirting with COVID-19.

Leo Arathoon, Salamander Bay * * * If you want to preserve the name of the landmark Captain Cook Hotel at Paddington (Take a Captain Cook at this lunacy, 23/7), just stay away until the Marxists retreat.

Patrick Hennessy, Penshurst * * * With regard to the letter (Pension not pain, 23/7), if D. Cooper is able to do everything he/she claims to do on the old age pension, then I think he/she should be running for the Treasurer's position at the next election.

Pam Duffy, Oatley

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001