CARING FOR OUR YOUTH AS PANDEMIC ENDS No person in Australia should be under any illusion as to why we all need to vaccinate when we hear news that emergency departments are witnessing an explosion in young people with self-harm issues and eating disorders (Teen self harm spike, 26/2).

The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic with its associated lockdowns and restrictions was always going to have damaging consequences on the emotional wellbeing and mental health of people, especially children and young people.

Research has found that a majority of young people with existing mental health needs found the pandemic had contributed to further deterioration.

Excessive reliance on social media to maintain social connections has further raised concerns about the impact of excessive screen time on development, particularly for younger children.

We are winning the pandemic war now and it is imperative that we do not leave any emotionally damaged child or young person behind.

Peter Penglis, Kambah, ACT """ It's all very well to address the burgeoning youth mental issue with more psychiatrists, registrars, mental health nurses and smoothing treatment pathways. But what about the problem? Why are kids having these issues? Could it be the insidious and unsafe nature of social media; our school system, which tends to accept teachings of world doom and gloom; cancel culture; or near hysterical climate zealotry and other such ideology, that kids are being swamped with. Treat the problems and some of these youth issues may diminish.

Peter Cattlin, Freshwater LIFELINE 13 11 14

US special envoy needs to respect our independence US President Joe Biden's climate change warrior and special envoy, John Kerry, must clearly explain how reducing our coal supply further will change the Earth's climate (Envoy's big dig at our coal, 26/2).

While I have great respect for the American people, some of their high-minded politicians need to respect the independence of other nations in regards to climate change decisions.

Australia has achieved much success with a cleaner environment and lowering CO2 emissions.

Perhaps it's a case of 'do as I say, not as I do' for envoy Kerry. R. Brown, Ballina

Our home-bred doomsayers Perhaps failed US presidential candidate John Kerry is not the only climate 'fool' (Election loser lashes out - Editorial, 26/2)?

Your editorial correctly singles out John Kerry and Al Gore for criticising Australia's use of fossil fuels, indicating both these climate alarmists lack the backbone to target "some rather obvious larger players"- let's say, China, which extensively relies on coal and emits colossal amounts of carbon dioxide.

This hypocrisy typifies the warped political debate surrounding climate, coal, and the very viability of our own economy.

Regrettably, Australia has many green 'doomsayer' politicians promoting similar 'road maps' to deindustrialisation. Australia needs to wake up.

Bob Partington, Wahroonga

Who will be real fossil fools?

Your story headlined "Envoy's big dig at our coal" (26/2) that included the panel headlined "Why we are no fossil fools", listed the benefits coal brings to our country via employment and revenue.

The problem is, the rest of the world couldn't care less about the benefits we Aussies gain from the sale of what is now regarded to be a toxic product.

Anyway, these sorts of highlights might rally the citizens on our home soil but will mean nothing when a worldwide embargo on the exportation of coal eventually comes into play.

Then we will find out who the "fossil fools" really are.

Robert May, Chester Hill

Young voice of reason Today I did what I do these day, I bought the Telegraph and bee-lined it to my favourite coffee shop on the banks of the beautiful Nepean River and prepared myself for a page-to-page briefing on this crazy world.

I habitually turn the pages to view Warren Brown's cartoon page and as usual he didn't disappoint. But something beneath the cartoon caught my eye.

A headline "No excuses; time to change" (Opinion, 26/2) and a photo of the story's author, Ash Learmonth.

This young man is the head prefect at Cranbrook Senior School, he calls himself a Cranbrookian.

Ash has a learning, a heart and soul way beyond his years. He also has a conscience about the terrible sexual abuse and equally terrible attitude he finds both within and beyond his school's doors - within the teenage boys today who, he says, have literally lost all sight and understanding of our young women.

I found his article dug deep into this old heart of mine.

He admits he doesn't have the answers and wasn't trying to 'preach', but his concern was palpable.

I urge every reader to access his comments. I'm sure his profound words of wisdom will give you cause to reflect on what has become a subject of great concern and none better expressed than by this young man.

Dave Burt, Kingswood

In a state of dishonesty Let's see if I have this correct. An agreement was reached last year by the board of the nation's treasurers (including Queensland's), an agreement I assume was signed by the treasurers of each state (We just want a fair go - Anna Caldwell, 26/2).

Watching the news I saw Queensland's Health Minister Steven Miles tearing up this agreement and saying Queensland would not pay $30m owed to NSW for accommodating Queensland residents during the pandemic when Queensland refused to open its borders, unless the federal government approved (and I assume also pay for) a national quarantine hub in Toowoomba.

Firstly, I believe the agreement constitutes a contract. Accordingly, if Queensland refuses to pay the NSW government should sue the Queensland government for breach of contract.

Secondly, if approval is given to build the quarantine hub will it be for everyone regardless of where they come from or will it be for Queenslanders only, like their hospitals?

B. Thompson, Cowra

Cringing north of border Surely the honest and principled citizens of Queensland must cringe at the behaviour of their Premier and Treasurer.

They know that NSW is being cheated out of money owed by their state for the hotel quarantining of their returning travellers.

As Anna Caldwell states, we didn't indulge in "NSW hotels are for NSW people" a phrase their Premier used against the residents of northern NSW who urgently needed to go to their hospitals during the pandemic (We just want a fair go - Opinion, 26/2).

Surely the decent Queenslanders can't endorse, in any way, the ripping up of our invoice by their juvenile and churlish Treasurer.

Maybe we could credit the $30m owed and reissue a new invoice to include the costs of NSW Police and NSW Health services to reflect a more realistic figure.

Marg Swindells, Castle Hill

Briefly ...

Let's give Queensland a deal that whomever loses the Origin series this year pays for the winner's quarantine bills.

Teddy Bankstown """ Well, what do you know? No charges to be laid against Tiger Woods for his high-speed car crash (Lucky to have lived, 26/2). Looks like Tiger can drive as fast as he likes, on and off the golf course.

Ian Peterson, Frenchs Forest

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001