1980 When the full-time siren sounded that night, the scoreboard read Queensland 20 NSW 10 and there was jubilation up north. The annual match-up between the two state teams had long been very one-sided but in 1980 they had tried something new. Players were selected not by the state where they were currently playing senior rugby league, but according to what state they first played in.

The experiment was first tried on July 8, 1980,40 years ago today. It was so successful it established a yearly State of Origin competition, which this year has been held over until November because of COVID-19. But the interstate rivalry dated back much further, to 1908, when Queensland fielded its first rugby league team against NSW and copped a 43-0 thrashing. One Sydney sports writer pronounced them "the weakest lot of footballers I have even seen come down from Queensland".

Despite this, league became enormously popular in Queensland and the state gained in strength and took every series from 1922-26, and again in 1928, 1931 and 1932. But then there was only one series win in the '40s and two in the '50s before a period of Blues domination.

The Maroons' victory in 1959 was the last time they would win under the system that allowed ex-Queenslanders to play for NSW. Between 1960 and 1980, when State of Origin rules were introduced, Queensland won only 10 games out of 68.

Over the decades many Queenslanders went to play in the Sydney competition. There was more money and more prestige, and match-ups between the state sides usually showed Queensland to be inferior.

For decades it rankled Queensland that players who had begun in local teams ended up playing in the NSW team against fellow Queenslanders. The view persisted in the NSW rugby league that the Queensland league ran a second-rate competition but it was a first-rate nursery for up-and-coming NSW players.

Queenslander Paul Vautin once said he grew up "thinking there was something special about anyone who played in Sydney". Sydney teams were inclined to agree and there were complaints that matches against paltry Queensland sides were a waste of time.

But in the 1960s people began to call for a competition between two teams selected according to the state the footballers had originally played for. One of the first advocates was former Queensland representative Jack Reardon. In a 1964 newspaper article he said that spectators at a 41-3 caning of the Maroons by NSW had suggested Queensland be allowed to "call on their former players now with Sydney clubs". Most administrators, players and fans of NSW rugby league were against the idea. But interest among fans was waning by the late '70s and there were fears there was far more interest in watching the more powerful Queensland rugby union team beat the NSW rugby union side.

The head of the Queensland Rugby League at that time was Labor senator Ron McAuliffe. His brief football career playing for Brisbane's Northern Suburbs in the 1930s was cut short by World War II, when he served in the AIF in the Middle East and New Guinea. Initially he was sceptical about a State of Origin competition, thinking that forcing expats to play together as a state side might not create a team strong enough to beat NSW. But McAuliffe became convinced of the potential loyalty of an origin side by journalist Hugh Lunn, who told him: "There is no such thing as an ex-Queenslander, Ron. They're like Catholics. There's only ever lapsed Queenslanders." The origin concept had already worked well with Australian rules, when a West Australian side beat Victoria in 1977. This inspired Queensland businessman Barry Maranta to draw up a proposal for a league State of Origin contest. McAuliffe pitched the idea to NSW Rugby League boss Kevin Humphreys who, despite initial resistance, eventually got a trial approved. That game was to be played in 1980, as the third in a series, with the first two matches played under the usual selection rules.

For that third game, former Queenslander Arthur Beetson was selected as captain. Beetson, then 35, was one of that state's most successful league exports. Nearing the end of a glorious career, he had never played for Queensland and relished the opportunity to lead the team. The side also included a young Mal Meninga and Wally Lewis. McAuliffe told the players there was a $2000 bonus if they won.

They didn't disappoint. In front of a Queensland home crowd, in an exciting, sometimes violent match, a legend was born.