There's no edge going the sledge WHAT a riveting Test match. It's a pity the final day was marred by the appalling behaviour of Tim Paine in his exchange with Indian batsman Ravi Ashwin (Growling pains, 12/1). This on top of the behaviour of Steve Smith in remarking the batsman's mark in an attempt to throw him off his game.

Looks like the Australian cricket team are back to their old ways. This is how other countries perceive us as a nation through, among other things, the actions of our sporting teams. We are all judged by their actions. They should be reminded of that. It's time we showed some class.

John Lyden, Zetland

Just when it seemed that when Tim Paine replaced Steve Smith as captain after Sandpapergate he set about restoring our reputation and removing the 'ugly Australian' tag, his disgraceful behaviour in the Third Test has destroyed those efforts and returned to the idea that if you can't get the batsman out by legitimate means resort to sledging and abuse. How disappointing. I hope India stick it to them now.

Ted Ellis, Botany

So we now have a sledger as Australian cricket captain. Tim Paine went over accepted banter to Ravi Ashwin as India fought hard to draw the Sydney Test. Paine's dropped catches should be his main concern.

Geoff Hinds, Merrylands

McGowan bordering on a power trip Western Australian Premier Mark McGowan delivered a low blow to NSW for its handling of the COVID crisis in stating elimination was better than achieving no community transmission (WA joins in sick border brawl, 12/1).

The bigger issue now is that some Premiers are on an unprecedented power trip. They think they are experts in everything and anything.

It's a wonder Premier McGowan hasn't taken the Mexican wall approach and started building his own. State border closures have impacted families, trade and tourism. If the federal Government wasn't so accommodating in giving money to keep the economy going things would be completely different. After this is all over it will be interesting when Premiers get together to discuss things. You will be able to sense the tension and cut the air with a knife. It will take a long time to heal relations.

Joe Kovac, Prestons

Weak constitution Premier Mark McGowan (WA joins in sick border brawl, 12/1) and the other socialist state Premiers by their own actions demonstrate their total disregard to Section 92 of the Australian constitution.

But to criticise NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian, who has been the only one to act correctly throughout this whole episode is disgraceful. I'm also very disappointed with Prime Minister Morrison in not defending our Australian constitution.

Barry Stenner, Tweed Heads

Sad state of affairs I'm tired of having my constitutional freedom to travel restricted solely because I live in Sydney. Please withdraw NSW from receiving any overseas returnees; let the other States, especially Western Australia, be the quarantine cleaners for COVID-19.

WA citizens need to get a taste of what we have had to endure the past 12 months, particularly considering their bragging that they can do it better. Fair go, mate.

Peter G. White, West Ryde

Fly by nighter Mark McGowan, it's easy to say that NSW can't handle the COVID-19 problem. Well, as from today Western Australia can take all return travellers from overseas.

As it stands NSW is taking most of them. And yes, Annastacia Palaszczuk, Queensland should take your fair share, too.

Leo Christensen, Cranebrook

Switched on Origin Energy's plans for a $1 billion battery (Mega battery projects to spark green power, 12/1) doesn't mention that batteries store energy, but do not create it, and fails to say where the energy will come from.

Perhaps they are wise to site the battery in a coal field, so on windless nights they can burn some coal to charge the batteries. If they do, I recommend a High Efficiency, Low Emissions coal plant that can generate continuous power for 50 years, rather than the four hours claimed for their battery.

This would be funny if we were not all facing higher power costs from this crazy idea.

Doug Hurst, Chapman, ACT

Get to the point All you anti-vaxxer clowns hiding behind social media should adhere to Louise Roberts (Anti-vax going viral, 12/1). We are still fighting COVID and all they can do is squawk their diatribe against vaccination.

Erwin Vitnell, Bathurst

Testing times While I applaud the NSW Premier and her team for the job they are doing in dealing with the COVID situation, I can't help but be frustrated with what are seemingly contradictory statements being made regarding testing (Race to solve mystery source, 12/1).

On the one hand we are told that there is no attempt to eradicate the virus because that is not possible. Instead, we are told that the aim is for zero community transmission which makes sense. On the other hand, every day someone says the testing numbers need to be higher.

Now if, as stated, the aim is to eradicate community transmission then presumably people won't have symptoms because they haven't caught the virus. If they don't have symptoms or haven't been in close contact with someone who has tested positive then presumably they don't need testing so the numbers are what they are.

So is the case that what the government wants is as many people as possible to get tested regardless of whether they have symptoms or not or do they only want those with symptoms or who have been in close contact with someone who has tested positive to get tested? If the former, then they should say so, instead of every day stating the requirement for testing is "even if you have the mildest of symptoms". I find it very confusing.

Brent Hedges, Manly

Profits all atwitter All sides of politics should be opposing the censorship of the US President (MPs not so tweet on censoring Trump, 12/1).

Twitter allowed Trump's 88.7 million followers to directly communicate with him, including those wishing to be critical. In practice, Twitter's relationship with Trump was one of interdependence.  Bypassing the "fake" media was otherwise impossible. Millions of followers are great advertising revenue. Rusticating their (orange) goose laying golden eggs will be costly. Yesterday, Twitter reported a first quarter $8.4 million loss compared to last year's $191 million profit. With $3.43 billion debt, Twitter itself may be following Trump out the door. Epitaph writers might ponder the cost.

Alan Sexton, North Parramatta

Briefly ...

When WHO inspectors finally get into Wuhan to trace the origin of COVID-19 all they'll find will be traces of fresh paint.

Tom, Drummoyne

* * * Banning Donald Trump from any social media platform means nothing - he will start his own. It will be short on punctuation, grammar and probably the truth, but that will make it interesting. I look forward to signing on.

Herbert Montaine, Tugun, Qld

* * * The new Lamb Council advert is brilliant but I have no doubt President Palaszczuk will make a complaint to the Advertising Standards Board.

John Stuart, St Fillans

* * * Australian skipper Tim Paine's decision to bat first in Melbourne and his poor keeping has badly affected Australia's chances of winning the series against India. The three dropped catches on day five in Sydney were not very difficult and let India off the hook. A good leader but now in his twilight.

John Donohoe, Epping

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001