Government shutdown threat for future NRL breaches DEPUTY Premier John -Barilaro has warned that the NSW Government could shutdown the NRL season if players again breach COVID-19 guidelines, saying: "This is the warning shot." A crucial figure in rugby league's push to restart on May 28, Barilaro has told The Daily Telegraph he supports the decision to fine, rather than suspend, NRL stars Latrell Mitchell, Nathan Cleary and Josh Addo-Carr for serious public health breaches.

CONTINUED PAGE 78 FROM BACK PAGE Despite calls from several commentators, including Phil Gould, to ban all three players for the season, they will now be free to play after paying a combined $44,000.

Yesterday, the NRL fined Mitchell and Addo-Carr $50,000 each (60 per cent of which is suspended) for their northern NSW camping trip.

Penrith No.7 Nathan Cleary was also slugged $10,000 (60 per cent suspended) after images emerged of him socialising at home on Anzac Day with at least five young women.

While each player also received a one-match ban, that too has been suspended until the end of the season.

A fourth player, Newcastle's Tyronne Roberts-Davis, received the same sanctions as Cleary after attending the same camping trip as Mitchell and Addo-Carr.

Barilaro described the sanctions as "fair" but warned that further indiscretions could mean the code is shut down immediately.

"This is the warning shot," said Barilaro, who has played a major role in several negotiations, including getting the -Warriors into Australia by May 4.

"When the game gets going again, no player can breach the rules. Once the NRL competition is up and running, players must understand their actions could have broader ramifications for the entire game.

"We understand no player has ever been bigger than rugby league. Which is why it's important in this situation we deal with individuals and don't punish the game.

"Or not yet. But if this happens again when the season is back under way, if there are more and more breaches, the NRL will be held accountable by both the public and the NSW Government." Asked if the sanctioned trio, who all represented NSW in Origin last year, had put the code's hyped season restart in doubt, Barilaro said: "I don't think it has sabotaged what we are trying to do.

"But it isn't helpful. We have convinced a lot of people to get this season under way again, but not everyone. I'm arguing (to government) that the NRL is putting measures in place to deal with all the restrictions around COVID-19, then before we even get going a couple of players breach those rules.

"People are working tirelessly to get rugby league going again and these -players jeopardise that." NSW Police are also investigating Cleary over possible breaches of social distancing after images of the Panthers halfback emerged with girls, said to be friends of his sister. It is alleged the group stayed only briefly at a home the 22-year-old shares with fellow Panther Tyrone May.

Asked about the fines, ARLC chairman Peter V'landys suggested the players had put "the game and the community at risk"."It's certainly hard to accept such behaviour when the game is doing everything it can to persuade the community that its players are responsible and behave appropriately," he said.