SAINT AJINKYA Rahane for restoring a nation's pride. Thrown into the fire when he was appointed to replace dad-to-be Virat Kohli as India captain in the wake of the nation's worst defeat, Rahane redeemed his country with a stunning eight-wicket win over Australia. Piling on the runs with the bat, Rahane was also impeccable with his field placements and decision-making.

SINNER THE NRL for giving Brent Naden a one-month backdated ban for testing positive to an illicit drug. Found guilty of using cocaine in the aftermath of the Panthers' grand final loss to Melbourne, the backdated ban means Naden will not miss a day of pre-season training. He has effectively escaped punishment in a move that sends a poor message to generation next.

SHOOSH WHICH highprofile NRL back is rated as a 50/50 chance to rejoin his club for the remainder of the pre-season? The former Origin player has been struggling to deal with a number of personal matters.

SPOTTED BEAU Ryan enjoying five-star digs at Gerringong in a cliffside mansion known as the "Bunker House". Built by his mate Neil Hipwell of Instagramfamous building company Future Flip, Ryan was one of several Range Rover-driving guests to visit the fast-becoming-famous south coast house over the festive break. Wallabies legend John Eales was spotted a stone's throw away in Gerroa playing tennis with Aussie popstar Guy Sebastian.

SPOTTED BULLDOGS recruit Luke Thompson getting his first real taste of the Aussie summer on a beach break in Port Stephens. We are hoping some of his Dogs teammates tipped the English enforcer up about wearing sunscreen. Thompson has shrugged off the homesickness of late last year after being reunited with his long-term partner. We are hearing he is in a good place and ready to deliver on his much-hyped potential.

SPOTTED RYAN Walkinshaw was also getting his first Oz tan, with the English owner of Walkinshaw Andretti United unable to spend the festive season with his UK-based family because of COVID-19. He's been stuck in Australia since February and is fast losing his English accent. Aside from running one of Supercars' best teams, Walkinshaw has also added caravan company New Age Caravans to a business stable that also includes the iconic HSV.

SPOTTED KEEPING the English theme going, a bevy of Pommies were spotted at Ricky Stuart's Canberra home on Christmas Day. Known to be a father-like figure as well as a coach, Stuart invited all the English Canberra players to his home for a Christmas Day feast. We would hate to be paying the food bill given the size of the guests, which included giant backrower Elliott Whitehead.