THE race for this year's title has turned into a survival of the fittest, but some unfair advantages have exposed why not every team is getting an equal opportunity in 2020.

And as a mounting injury crisis grows, a leading expert has revealed why "major injuries" can be traced back to clubs which are struggling to cope with changes caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.

NRL physio Brien Seeney said that while overall injuries were slightly down this year, the number of injuries sidelining players for five weeks or more had almost doubled - jumping from 3.97 per round in 2018 to 6.64 in 2020.

Thursday's blockbuster between the Sydney Roosters and Melbourne has been robbed of another big name in Storm superstar Cameron Munster (knee), who has joined Cameron Smith (shoulder) on a growing list of outs.

And the Roosters had nine players missing for last Thursday's win over St George -Illawarra.

Manly's Addin Fonua-Blake also injured a knee on the weekend as the Sea Eagles' season went from bad to worse, while Siliva Havili's tricep -injury is another blow to -Canberra.

Injuries have to be factored in every year but this season the 18 uninterrupted rounds on top of all the other changes has just turned it into an ironman event. There are no byes because of the post-season State of Origin, adding to the strain as we count down to the finals.

While no one is questioning the mighty job the NRL has done to get the comp back up and keep it going, it has come at a hefty cost to player health and injury management.

There are also some huge unfair advantages, specifically those relating to travel.

Just look at weekend rivals Penrith and Canberra.

The Raiders have racked up close to 70 hours of travel time this season. Ten of their 13 games have required long-haul trips by road or plane.

Competition frontrunners the Panthers have had just one game outside Sydney all season, against Gold Coast.

The Panthers' other "big" trip was to Lottoland to play Manly, a distance of 76km. They have also had three games at Kogarah, 65km away.

The Raiders basically have a six-hour road trip every time they play in Sydney given they can't stay at a hotel the night before a game or after it. And it all has an effect on prehab and rehab for players.

While Ivan Cleary was complaining about two questionable calls that went against Penrith during Saturday's win, the Canberra players were preparing to board the bus for another long haul back to the nation's capital.

It puts things in perspective.

While everyone understands there was little anyone could do to make it completely fair to all clubs, that doesn't deny that some clubs have been hugely disadvantaged.

Although, there are extenuating circumstances affecting every club to a degree. Newcastle has also had a stack of travel after home games were transferred to Gosford for a period, and the Knights were missing eight regulars in their smashing win over Wests Tigers on Saturday. Manly has been severely bashed up. Powerhouse prop Fonua-Blake (knee) is expected to miss two weeks, while big Marty Taupau is in doubt after a sickening stiff arm from Jack Hetherington.