The death sentence on an Australian drug smuggler is just part of Beijing's campaign against democracies

Did the Chinese Communist Party instruct a court in Guangzhou to impose the death sentence on an alleged Australian drug smuggler as part of its campaign to pressure our government into kowtowing to it?

We'll never know the answer, but the fact we are uncomfortably speculating about it is what Beijing wants.

It could be payback. We know that China's justice system is often used by Communist Party bosses to punish their political enemies. During the COVID-19 pandemic, a number of crazy-brave critics of President Xi Jinping have spoken out, with one calling him "a clown with no clothes on who was still determined to play emperor".

They have all disappeared, sucked into the dark world of China's secret prison system where mistreatment and torture are commonplace.

So the sentencing of Karm Gilespie may be one more punishment in Beijing's program of retaliation against Australia after our foreign minister Marise Payne proposed an independent international inquiry into the origin of the coronavirus and the response to it.

Beijing has slashed our barley and beef exports and is using its control over the media to convince Chinese people that Australia is such a racist country that it's too dangerous to come here.

The tourism and education industries expect to suffer. Who is next on Beijing's hit list?

When in 2018 Canada, acting on a US extradition request, arrested a top Huawei executive Beijing flew into a rage. It bullied Ottawa relentlessly. It imposed trade sanctions. And it arrested on trumped up charges two Canadians travelling in China.

Michael Spavor and Michael Kovrig have been rotting in China's jails ever since, bargaining chips in Beijing's nasty game.

Now that we are in the bad books, should Australians in China be nervous that they too may become collateral damage?

HONG KONG TAKEOVER The people of Hong Kong understand how terrifying the Chinese regime can be. That's why there's deep anxiety about Beijing's plans to impose a new national security law on the former British territory.

The law, along with the introduction of mainland security and intelligence agencies, would likely spell the end of Hong Kong's political freedoms.

There will be a crackdown on free speech. The courts will no longer be independent. Educating children about democratic values and universal human rights will be replaced with lessons in Xi Jinping Thought.

All of which explains why Britain is preparing for the possibility that up to three million Hongkongers will want to migrate there.

Australia too can expect a flood of residency applications from worried Hongkongers escaping their new -oppressors.

We should welcome them with open arms. For the most part, they will make excellent citizens because they will have a strong commitment to human rights and democratic freedoms, perhaps more so than the average Australian, who is inclined to take those freedoms for granted and doesn't understand the serious threat posed by the Chinese Communist Party.

Tens of thousands, or even hundreds of thousands, of Hongkongers will also bring much-needed skills and cultural treasures.

In my new book, Hidden Hand: How the Chinese Communist Party Is Reshaping The World, co-authored with Mareike Ohlberg, we describe how the Communist Party insinuates itself into Chinese diaspora communities like Australia's to gain influence and to mobilise some to work in China's interests.

It does so with inducements, threats and the exploitation of patriotic sentiment towards "the motherland".

One great benefit for Australia from an influx of Hongkongers committed to freedom and opposed to the Communist Party is that it would make it more difficult for the party to engage in its "united front" influence activities in this country. Hongkongers know how the party operates.

And it would destroy the argument of Beijing's sympathisers in this country who accuse CCP critics of being motivated by racism and Sinophobia. A few Chinese-Australians speak out already, but with an influx from Hong Kong we would see many more speaking out against CCP influence here and against oppression in Hong Kong, Xinjiang, Tibet and the mainland.

After the 1989 Tiananmen Square Massacre, when CCP hardliners sent in the tanks to crush students calling for greater freedoms and democracy in China, Prime Minister Bob Hawke famously announced that the government would allow 42,000 Chinese students in Australia to stay. Most did and went on to become citizens, with many also bringing family members.

But there are lessons to be learned from Bob Hawke's decision. One is that China's security -services and "united front" agents will try hard to intimidate and silence the new arrivals, including threatening their families and business interests in Hong Kong and the Chinese -mainland.

The Australian government has been slow to protect Australian citizens of Chinese heritage from surveillance and intimidation by Beijing's notorious security agencies, like the Ministry of State Security.

And not only citizens of Chinese heritage. Last month we learned that Mack Horton's family endured a two-year campaign of terror after Mack called out Chinese swimmer Sun Yang as a drug cheat. The threats and harassment only stopped in February when Sun Yang was banned from swimming for eight years.

Around the world, the CCP is promoting China's authoritarian system of government as superior to the West's liberal democracy.

Democracy has its faults - just look at the United States today. But only those with a slave mentality would rather live under Chinese Communist Party rule. Clive Hamilton is professor of public ethics at Charles Sturt University in Canberra.