Confidential looks back on a COVID-ruled 2020 and the stars behind the year's biggest headlines

Any pretty face can book a job, says Sydney-based model Georgia Fowler - but only a pro can build a career.

And the Kiwi-born stunner would know. The latter half of 2020 has turned into a seminal era for the 27-year-old who has become one of the world's most in-demand models seemingly overnight, booking lucrative campaigns for Louis Vuitton, Topshop, Victoria Secret, Fendi, Dior, Burberry and Cartier in the space of just a few months.

It is a purple patch that has also rocketed the catwalk queen to the top of the international money list, with her estimated 2020 earnings inching the $1 million mark.

The key to her success, she tells Confidential, lies in the work ethic she inherited from her former golf pro dad Peter Fowler.

"I'm a really persistent person and I think that is in my blood a little bit. My dad was a pro golfer and he was famous for being the first one on the practice course and the last one off it," says Fowler.

"But I also think it comes from being in the game for nearly 12 years. Brands and clients really know me now and photographers know that I am going to work hard.

"Any beautiful face can book one job but it's the re-bookings that make your career."

DINING DO-OVER THE surge of COVID-19 in March saw Sydney's dynamic dining scene brought to its knees as restaurants shuttered one-by-one and business owners were left wondering if they would ever recover.

However, with crisis came ingenuity as many top eateries - from cafes to fine diners - were re-imagined. Pubs became grocery stores, bakeries sold toilet paper and white-table cloth restaurants sent their armies of black-tie waiters out into the streets on mopeds as high-end food and cocktail delivery drivers.

It was Sydney's culinary spirit writ large and, as business now returns to normal, will be remembered as a true phoenix from the ashes moment.

"Eight months since this all started business is better for us than it has ever been," says Darryl Martin, whose Marrickville eatery Bazaari was transformed from a high-end diner to a thriving takeaway and delivery service during the shutdown.

"Compared to where we were a year ago business is up 200 per cent. Now things are back to normal we have done away with the delivery side of things but we are still doing a truckload of takeaways which is a revenue stream we never had before.

"It has been rocky, don't get me wrong. But we have returned to being a stable business and for that we are very grateful."

HELLO HOLLYWOOD Kicking the pandemic's butt brought with it some unexpected but welcome windfalls for Australia - none more so than the unprecedented flood of Hollywood studios and streaming services who clamoured to relocate productions to our virtually COVID-free shores.

By August every major film and TV star, by way of Byron Bay, seemed to be alighting in Sydney to begin a backlog of blockbuster productions which continue to pump millions into the local film economy - Mark Wahlberg, Zac Efron, Idris Elba, Natalie Portman, Liam Neeson, Nicole Kidman, Melissa McCarthy and Chris Evans to name just a few.

In fact the boom, according to local set builder Greg Hadju who has 40 years of experience under his belt, is nothing short of an entertainment industry "gold rush" moment.

"There have been booms but this is definitely the biggest one in long time," says Hadju, who constructed the elaborate sets being used on - among other major productions - Thor: Love and Thunder and the upcoming $60 million George Miller epic Three Thousand Years of Longing.

"It is the first time I have ever been in the position where I have had to turn work away because I can't find the crews."

AND WHO COULD FORGET...

Broadway beckons for Farnsy: In news that falls under the banner of "what took so long", it was announced this year that the music of legendary Aussie crooner John Farnham will finally make it to the stage. Theatre impresario Michael Cassel (who is bringing Hamilton to the stage in Australia) will oversee the production which will not be based on Farnham's life but instead will be a fictional story set to a Farnham soundtrack.

SAS surprise: Channel 7 may have taken some hits at the start of the year - none more regrettable than the DOA turkey that was Plate of Origin. But the network came home strong this year with SAS: Australia which pitted a pile of celebs, including former Miss Universe Erin McNaught and rugby player Nick Cummins, against each other in a military endurance course and earned the network the year's best new reality concept. Movie-star romance: It was the unconventional love story we couldn't get enough of in 2020. Movie star Zac Efron swaps Hollywood for Byron Bay and subsequently falls for the local coffee shop waitress. Six months on the pair have weathered break-up rumours and continue to live the fairytale - giving hope to frustrated cafe workers everywhere.