SNAPPING UP THE TALENT BRAITH Anasta has signed up his first talent as a rugby league player manager. Lachlan Ilias, 19, is a former Australian Schoolboys rugby union star and a backline utility at South Sydney. He's also played in Australia's Youth Sevens team.

The youngster has played league for NSW under-16s as well and Anasta is in talks with the Rabbitohs about Ilias's future at Redfern.

There is also talk of Melbourne Storm winger Josh Addo-Carr being keen to join Anasta's stable.

Addo-Carr had a falling out with his agent Gavin Orr before Orr was banned for two years by the NRL integrity unit.

ALLIANZ REBUILD AHEAD OF SCHEDULE HERE'S the proof that work is finally under way on the foundations for the new Allianz Stadium at Moore Park - and the massive engineering project is even ahead of schedule.

The fact no sport is being played next door at the SCG due to the COVID-19 sporting lockdown means builders don't have to stop working on event days.

Infrastructure NSW has also extended building work on Saturdays from 7am to 6pm to help stimulate the economy.

It is hoped the 45,000-seater will be ready to host State of Origin in 2022.

SPINNER'S BOSS LOSS IT has been a tough week for highly regarded media minder Daniel Meers. Meers used to work as chief media adviser to Malcolm Turnbull, the ex-PM who has copped a pasting and threats of being banned for life from the Liberal Party over the release of his new book.

Meers left the PM's office when ScoMo took the top job and found a new gig at NRL headquarters as Todd Greenberg's head of spin. He will stay on to work for Andrew Abdo.

SAM SITS IN RETIRED Rabbitohs superstar and Fox Sports commentator Sam Burgess is so highly regarded by NRL executives that he has been invited to sit in on Project Apollo meetings at Moore Park headquarters. Alongside RLPA boss Clint Newton, Burgess has offered useful advice about player-related issues in the countdown to the resumption of play on May 28.

T20 TO BE BOUNCED UNTIL 2021

THERE is very strong mail the T20 World Cup will be postponed until February, by which time our borders are more than likely to be opened for international visitors.

The tournament is scheduled from October 18 to November 15 in Australia. Channel 9 has the broadcast free-to-air rights and has been using it as an excuse to try to stop the NRL competition from going into late October and November.

The move to February next year would allow the NRL to play the grand final at the SCG and also allow for the ANZ Stadium refurbishment to begin in late July instead of being held back to host the premiership decider.

WRONG FLIGHT THE poor old NRL can't take a trick. During the off-season, the game dumped a long-time arrangement with Qantas to switch to Virgin Airlines, the same carrier as the AFL.

Virgin has since gone bust and into voluntary administration. When the competition resumes, out-of-town teams will be travelling on chartered jets.But at some stage when things get back to normal, acting CEO Andrew Abdo will have to find a new airline deal - and possibly go cap in hand back to Qantas.