JOSH Aloiai will bring his boots or his lawnmower when the Wests Tigers play Manly as part of a bumper Anzac Day round seven clash.

The Tigers and Manly grudge match will join the annual games between St George Illawarra and the Roosters and Melbourne playing the Warriors on April 25 - which falls on a Sunday next year.

While it is likely Aloiai will be lining up for the Sea Eagles in that match, his future still remains uncertain ahead of his planned return to Tigers training on Monday.

The Tigers have ramped up negotiations with Broncos forward Joe Ofahengaue in recent days which would free Aloiai to join Manly -immediately.

The first half of next season is dominated by grudge matches and players seeking retribution against their former clubs. Payne Haas and new Titans recruit Tino Fa'asuamaleaui won't have to wait long to renew their rivalry in what is a now highly anticipated local derby between Brisbane and the Gold Coast on the Gold Coast in round two. David Fifita will play against the Broncos for the first time.

A week later, the Roosters and South Sydney will showdown in round three after again dominating headlines in the off-season regarding the tug of war for the long-term signature of youngster Joseph Suaalii.

Tyson Frizell will get an early chance to impress against former club St George Illawarra in round four when the Knights host the Dragons.

The Warriors have been slated to host games in Auckland despite the ongoing uncertainty regarding COVID-19. One of their first home games will be up against Addin Founa-Blake's former club Manly in round five. The clubs clash again just four weeks later.

ARL chairman Peter V'landys said he expected the Warriors to be able to travel freely between Australia and New Zealand for matches.

"We're very confident that the international borders will be open by that stage," V'landays said.

"We all know a vaccine is -imminent - at least we hope it is. "Every decision we've taken at the NRL, we have done on the scientific data and the expert advice from the best biosecurity expert in -Australia, who is very balanced.

"He tells us that he believes we will be playing our games in New Zealand in the first round. If it doesn't happen we have contingencies in place for all scenarios." Brothers Blayke and Jayden Brailey could finally get a chance to play against each other in round six when the Knights host Cronulla.

One of the game's emerging rivalries Canterbury and Penrith will play in round 12. The Bulldogs have already pinched coach Trent Barrett, prop Jack Hetherington and rising half Matt Burton from the Panthers.

Barrett will also coach against former club Manly in rounds 16 and 24. St George Illawarra recruit Jack Bird faces his former club the -Broncos in round 13.

While most of the high profile showdowns happen in the early part of the season, Kyle Flanagan will have to wait until round 17 when his Bulldogs play the Roosters. New Dragons coach Anthony Griffin won't coach against his former club Penrith until round 22.

The draw will be announced today.

2021 GRUDGE MATCHES ■ Round two: Brisbane v Gold Coast The fuse has already been lit for this local derby after Payne Haas and new Titans recruit Tino Fa'asuamaleaui traded fists in Origin II. The Titans have also signed former Bronco David Fifita on one of the richest contracts in the game.

■ Round three: South Sydney v Sydney Roosters Bitter rivals who do not need any extra motivation to incite their fans. This offseason again put the two teams against each other for the long-term signature of youngster Joseph Suaalii. There is a suggestion Suaalii could be cleared to play before his 18th birthday in a potential showdown against South Sydney.

■ Round three: Penrith v Melbourne The Panthers get to host the grand final rematch. While there is no way of avenging their premiership loss, they can show there is no lingering mental torment by beating the Storm.

■ Round four: Newcastle v Dragons Tyson Frizell won't have to wait long to play his former club. And he gets to do so in front of his new home fans. Frizell was one of the highest-profile defections.

■ Rounds five and round nine: Manly v Warriors Manly will have to try to stop Addin Fonua-Blake twice in five weeks. Fonua-Blake wanted out of the Sea Eagles and quickly found a home at the Warriors.

■ Round six: South Sydney v Wests Tigers Can the Tigers do what South Sydney couldn't and ensure James Roberts stays on track? By round six we should know if the Tigers' gamble is paying off or not.

■ Round seven: Wests Tigers v Manly It could be BYO paintbrushes depending on what plays out for Josh Aloiai. It is unclear which team he will turn out for this week but there is little loved lost between the two clubs.

■ Round 12: Penrith v Canterbury First Canterbury pinched Trent Barrett. Then it was Jack Hetherington and now it is Matt Burton. And you get the sense the Bulldogs aren't done with rampaging through Penrith's stocks.

■ Round 13: Dragons v Broncos Jack Bird had an unhappy stint at Brisbane, where he struggled with injuries. He gets the chance at his junior club to show if he is back to his best. ■ Round 17: Canterbury v Roosters Kyle Flanagan was made the scapegoat at the Roosters. He has quickly been embraced by the Bulldogs faithful. He has to wait a while to show the Roosters what they are missing out on.