BIGGER CROWD THAN GRAND FINAL DESPITE a disappointing series opener, State of Origin II is on track to host the biggest sporting crowd in Australia since COVID-19 hit our shores with close to 40,000 expected at ANZ Stadium on Wednesday night and seating in corporate suites all but gone. The demand for corporate suites and tickets has been far higher than even the NRL grand final, which drew a crowd of 37,303. ANZ Stadium has become a Blues fortress, with NSW boasting an impressive record of 18 wins, nine losses and one draw since 1999 despite Queensland's series dominance.

BOYD NEEDS 12 MONTHS OFF: DOCTOR LOU Lewis, a doctor, has been involved in Australian boxing for 40 years and says, if Boyd Cordner was in the fight game, he would advise him to stand down for 12 months. "Anyone who suffers three concussions in one season should take a year off," Lewis said. "I've been saying for many years, football players should be under the same rules as boxers. "That's 28 days for the first concussion, no sparring, and if it happens again, he's off for three months and then they're off for a year and need a full neurological assessment. "If in doubt, keep them out." Lewis advised 30 years ago that the footy codes should adopt the same rules as boxing. "I was told there'd be no one left to play," he said. "Obviously, it's changed with the more research that is now available and the NRL approaches it very seriously."

HEAVYWEIGHT HOSTS IT would be the biggest boxing match ever staged in this country … There are plans to bring heavyweight superstars Tyson Fury and Deontay Wilder to Australia in the new year. Matchroom Sports promoter Eddie Hearn has been in talks with venues in Australia to stage Wilder v Fury III. The appeal is Australia is virtually COVID-free while the UK and US can only host events inside a bubble with no fans.

$100M IN CUP BETS THE interest in the US election has blown away State of Origin with NSW punters. The TAB held more than $20 million on Trump v Biden but just $3.5m on last Wednesday night's Origin I in Adelaide. The Melbourne Cup on Tuesday blitzed them both. It held more than $100m.

RUGBY RATINGS DIVE NO wonder there are few tears at Fox Sports about the prospect of losing rugby union to Channel 9. This year's Super Rugby final had an average audience of just 110,000, compared with a monster 500,000 in 2011.

Overall, the average audience for Super Rugby games over the past five years has dropped by 36 per cent. Try getting advertisers on board with figures like that. At the same time, other big sports on the pay-TV network, including NRL and Supercars, have increased substantially.