MUNDINE HITS THE SWEET SPOT Anyone who has played sport at any level knows exactly what the "the sweet spot" is - an indisputable winner.

Warren Mundine's Daily Telegraph article (Our song and our game, 30/10) is an indelible sweet spot of truth.

Paul, Central Coast.

"" " What a fantastic opinion piece by Warren Mundine regarding the national anthem (Our song and our game, 30/10).

His comment that "if it wasn't for the general sports-loving Australian public who love to sing the anthem you highly paid sportspeople wouldn't be highly paid" has hit the nail right on the head.

John Stuart, St Fillans "" " Wonderful! Wonderful! Warren!

Thank you so much for your article today (Our song and our game, 30/10). You have restored my faith in human nature and I'm thrilled that the underestimated ability of having "commonsense" is still alive.

Ann Barnes, Davistown "" " I read Warren Mundine's article on the national anthem controversy (Our song and our game, 30/10).

All I can say about it is that he is a wonderful man with an Australian Aboriginal heart.

He should be our next prime minister.

The players that don't want the anthem are overpaid and should go and get a real job.

Leslie Parker, NSW

Rejoicing over uniting behind our anthem The backlash to the NRL's initial decision to ban the national anthem at the State of Origin gives me faith in my fellow Australians (All let us rejoice, 30/10).

Having gone through the bushfires and then COVID-19, the footy season has given us all a reason to cheer, thanks to Peter V'landys' brilliant negotiation skills.

Politics should never be a part of sport, therefore I am prepared to forgive the original misstep by the football officials on this occasion.

"We are one, we are Australian" and "united we stand, divided we fall"; just look at what is happening in America.

Janice Russell, Malua Bay

Protecting a national asset NRL officials were 100 per cent correct to initially omit the national anthem from State of Origin games (Origin of a backflip, 30/10). They were right, but for the wrong reasons.

The anthem should only be heard at events of national or international significance.

Military and state funerals, remembrance days and sporting occasions against other nations are appropriate.

Permission should be sought to use it, so valuable should it be to our national psyche.

It should not be allowed to be a political football for activists to show disrespect before polemic sporting games.

We must treat it as one of our truly national assets, withheld from frivolous overuse and devalued by those undermining our national identity and unity.

Aggressive, divisive and competing sporting teams pitting Australians against each other is surely the exact opposite to the call for unison echoing through the chords and lyrics of our anthem.

Alan Sexton, North Parramatta

Horror at French attack I was deeply shocked and saddened by the terrorist attack that took place in a church - the Notre Dame Basilica in Nice, France (Three parishioners dead in bloody terrorist attack, 30/10).

My thoughts and prayers are with the families of the victims and their loved ones.

I strongly condemn this terrorist attack and request everyone to stay united against this extreme violence so that we can defeat this extremist behaviour and ideology that is totally against the peaceful teaching of Islam.

Syed Sadaqat Ahmed, Tarneit, Victoria

Outrage on the menu What are they teaching university students these days? Have they introduced a new course that teaches people how to be outraged for no reason about things that have absolutely no effect on their lives?

Take the recent outrage from a university student on social media calling for the boycotting of a restaurant in Waterloo and labelling the owner a racist all because he said he supported Donald Trump in the upcoming US election (A meal with a side of Trump, 30/10).

Who cares? If I was that university student I would be asking myself why what other people think about a politician in a different country makes them so angry and consulting a dictionary to find out what the word racist really means.

I think it's actually just confected outrage expressed by sheep pretending they are activists, who think they are somehow supporting their compatriots in the US.

B Thompson, Cowra

Nazi stain needs erasing In recent times auction houses in Australia and New Zealand have been involved in the trade of Nazi memorabilia including flags.

On occasion Nazi objects have been pulled from sale due to public pressure. We are now told Nazi flags have been flown in public, including from suburban back yards, at least 31 times in the past two years (Nazi flags fly over NSW, Sunday 25/10).

It seems Section 93Z of the Crimes Act does not go far enough to outlaw Nazi flags from being flown.

Now there are calls for government action to stop this "racist cancer" in NSW. The government needs to take action to ban trade in these vile artefacts and, secondly, beef-up the Crimes Act in relation to flying Nazi flags.

Peter Penglis, Kambah, ACT

Postal boss deserves apology ScoMo, I think you made a big mistake in pillorying Christine Holgate in parliament ('Humiliated' by the PM, 30/10).

She deserved better than that. You should now apologise immediately - quietly if necessary - and find a way to set it right.

It's now time to admit to your over-reaction.

Chris Welch, Drummoyne

Is Anybody to blame?

I have listened diligently to the Board of Inquiry hearing and I have finally worked out the story of the hotel quarantine bungle in Victoria.

There were four people responsible named Everybody, Somebody, Anybody and Nobody.

There was an important job to be done and Everybody was sure that Somebody would do it.

Anybody could have done it, but Nobody did it.

Somebody got angry about that because it was Everybody's job. Everybody thought Anybody could do it, but nobody realised that Everybody wouldn't do it.

It ended up that Everybody blamed Somebody when Nobody did what Anybody could have.

I'm glad I cleared that up for you all. Good for a laugh in these tough times, especially in Victoria.

K. Bryant, Rivett, ACT

Briefly … Why are some condemning Annastacia Palaszczuk for closing the Queensland border, but praising Gladys Berejiklian for closing the NSW border to Victorians? A case of double standards?

Colleen Northam, Taree "" " Dear Matt Kean, please come to the Hunter Valley if you're game and explain to coal miners and gas workers why you want to destroy their livelihoods with renewables (He's Kean on green reasoning, not on gas, 29/10).

Dazza, Singleton "" " Where are all the brave and fearless leaders? Annastacia Palaszczuk and Joe Biden both want to win elections based on fear, fear and more fear. A sure-fire race to the bottom.

Arvid, Kiama

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001