QUEENSLAND, beautiful one day … Penrith the next.

After years spent preparing for State of Origin at venues such as XXXX Island and Clive Palmer's Coolum Resort, the 2020 Maroons are now being invited to bunk down next door to, or close enough, to NSW favourite Mark Geyer.

As part of a statewide push to have Sydney host all three Origin games this year, the Panthers Leagues Club Group has agreed to transform its hyped western Sydney facilities into Camp Maroon for all the series.

Even with Origin set to be played after the NRL Grand Final, Brisbane could still be ruled out as a host if the COVID-19 travel restriction remain in place.

Speaking with The Daily Telegraph yesterday, Panthers CEO Brian Fletcher confirmed his interest in hosting the Bananabenders, saying his organisation would do "whatever it takes" to make their complex feel like anything but enemy territory.

The move follows a joint push by both the NSW Government and NSWRL to host all three games of this year's series after Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk ruled out Brisbane as a venue for the duration of the COVID-19 health crisis.

Should the Penrith push be approved, Maroons coach Kevin Walters and his team would have access to a large complex which includes the revered Panthers Academy, which boasts two gyms, medical facilities and plunge pools.

Adjacent to that is the 200-room Mercure hotel, plus four training fields. Wonderfully for the Maroons, all facilities are also within walking distance to aqua golf, Cables Wake Park, hell even the Hooters restaurant may have reopened. So throw in a few kegs of XXXX and what isn't for them to love?

Already, NSWRL chief executive David Trodden has confirmed his interest in hosting all three Origin games in Sydney this year, with Bankwest Stadium the early venue favourite if the code remains in lockdown.

Walters has also confirmed his willingness to play the series out of enemy territory if required, with Panthers HQ now available should the QRL want to start making preparations.

"We'd love to have Queensland here," Fletcher said. "And whatever is -required, we can do it. "We've made them (NRL) aware of the facilities that are available … so they know we'd do anything to support the return of both rugby league and State of Origin football." Only last week, the Panthers Group put a proposal to the NRL innovation committee about using their facilities as a potential bubble for Queensland teams should they need to be housed here.

Trodden is a fan of transferring that idea to Origin, with Deputy Premier John Barilaro also a heavyweight backer of the Sydney -proposal.

Meanwhile, Fletcher suggested he also remained confident of the game resuming on May 28, despite Channel 9's stalling tactics.

"I'm confident we'll start on May 28," he said. "That's still a long way off and every indication with the virus is that we're getting less numbers every day which is great."So fingers crossed. It's all going in our favour for a safe return.."