BRYCE Cartwright and Jai Arrow headline a slew of familiar faces in unfamiliar places across the NRL pre-season.

Cartwright was handed a lifeline at Parramatta after he was released from his contract with the Gold Coast Titans.

Ready to prove his career is far from over, Cartwright, who has joined the Eels on a one-year deal, cut a fit and healthy figure during a training session this week as he fights for a place in coach Brad Arthur's top 17 in season 2021.

Jai Arrow can expect his Sydney initiation to be a baptism of fire after the former Titans forward finally reported to Redfern for his first pre-season under coach Wayne Bennett.

Arrow will feel the full force of the Rabbitohs' rivalry with the Sydney Roosters in round three, when he faces Tricolours fullback James Tedesco for the first time since an ugly concussion incident between the pair during the State of Origin decider last month.

The latest additions to the New Zealand Warriors roster were all smiles during their pre-season camp on the NSW south coast.

COVID-19 travel restrict-ions have forced Sean O'Sullivan, Addin Fonua-Blake, Euan Aitken and Marcelo Montoya into a training camp at Kiama.

With the Warriors set to base themselves in NSW from January 3 for at least three months, the club's newest faces are set to play their first game for the Warriors before even stepping a foot in New Zealand.

At Concord, rising forward Stefano Utoikamanu was the latest in a long list of new recruits to begin his first pre-season with the club.

The Eels junior only started his pre-season with the Tigers two weeks ago but the 115kg prop has already reached 'training the house down' status.

"He's already shown he has a good engine, Stef has been training the house down," fellow Tigers forward Luciano Leilua said.

The Canberra Raiders unveiled youngsters Albert Hopoate and former Wigan Warriors backrower Harry Rushton.

The pair joined coach Ricky Stuart's squad this week for their first pre-season in the nation's capital.

While Rushton has been secured on a three-year deal, Hopoate is on a train and trial contract and will use the summer to press his claims for a top 30 spot.

Canterbury's prize recruit Nick Cotric isn't due to report to Belmore until after Christmas but the outside back hasn't been able to keep away from the gym. Cotric and Penrith winger Josh Mansour, who is on the lookout for a new home and could himself be in new colours this pre-season, have been training together in their off-season break.