THERE is nothing more important in rugby league than helping your mate. Help them with a support run. Fill their space in defence. Doesn't matter what it is. Just be there. Same goes for this COVID-19 pandemic.

With rugby league's biggest players now preparing to go into lockdown, The Daily Telegraph has asked me to reveal the advice I'll be giving to Penrith and NSW Origin players as they prepare to spend weeks, even months in isolation. And my key point is the same one Blues coach Brad Fittler continually pushes in Origin camp: help someone else.

It is the same with Panthers coach Ivan Cleary. At a time when we are being increasingly isolated from society, a key ingredient to players staying healthy - both physically and mentally - will be finding a way to help others. Same deal the rest of us.

In fact, these 10 tips below are my advice on how we can all stay healthy as Australia goes into lockdown: 1. Find a way to help someone else. All the best athletes I've ever worked with think like this. Just as all the best people you've ever know will think like this. So be that person too.

2. Set up a good routine. My advice is to start each day with yoga, stretching, or even breathing exercises. Just agree to get mobile before looking at your iPhone. Also, while completing your morning routine acknowledge one thing you're grateful for - it helps.

3. Hydrate, and from the moment you wake up.

4. Surround yourself with a support team. Crucial, even in isolation. Find ways to remain connected with those who bring out your best.

5.Eat well. This takes effort and commitment, but your body will thank you. 6. Work on your mind. What better time than now to try meditation? Even if new for you, it doesn't matter. You owe it to yourself to try something, even breathing exercises.

7. Stay strong. Continue your gym workouts, even if it requires improvisation. Or just as importantly, START a gym routine. Break up your day with a couple of push-ups and sit ups, then tomorrow try to do more.

8. Stay connected. Too often, technology interferes with real connection. Use this time at home with family to talk. Technology now will also help you stay connected as it is with Panthers players so get the right balance.

9. Fill your mind with positive fuel. How? Consume positive content.10. Sleep well. This is your wonder drug. If I were rating these tips, this would be No.1. Even though you are no longer making the commute into town, still ensure you get a solid night of sleep. Everything starts from here.