KAYO SPORT POWER 100 After revealing 80 of Australia's biggest sporting powerbrokers yesterday, today we continue with the heavyweights in Part II - the Top 20

20 CAMERON MUNSTER Age: 26 NRL player Source of power: A premiership followed by a State of Origin series win with Queensland has made Munster the face of rugby league. Working part-time selling club memberships when he was signed by the Storm on a zero dollar contract, Munster is now the player kids emulate in the back yard. Munster was catapulted into stardom this year with the Melbourne Storm-Maroons double act. PHELPS

19 NICK KYRGIOS Age: 25 Tennis player Source of power: Australian tennis' great enigma is polarising to the nth degree but does have public cut-through. He started the ball rolling for sports-related bushfire donations with $200 per ace and the trickle soon became a torrent. He also said what many were thinking but not brave enough to say when he lashed out at world No.1 Novak Djokovic for his blatantly reckless behaviour during privately organised tournaments where COVID protocols went out the window. Many subsequently echoed his views. His profile stretches beyond his current world ranking of 45 and the fact he has never made a Grand Slam semi-final. Many still loathe him. Some love him. Few are in the middle. But he is impossible to ignore. CRADDOCK

18 PATRICK DANGERFIELD Age: 30 Geelong AFL star andAFLPA president Source of power: As vice-captain of Geelong, Dangerfield is constantly ranked among the best five players in the comp, while juggling his duties as president of the players' union. Has a direct line to Gillon McLachlan and sits on the league's competition committee, which oversees the implementation of rules and policies. A polished media performer, the 2016 Brownlow medallist took the heat as the AFLPA twice stared down the league over pay cuts during the COVID crisis shutdown. Has the skillset to become a formidable football official or even a commissioner in retirement. WARNER

17 MATTY JOHNS Age: 49 NRL commentator Source of power: The most respected public voice in rugby league, Johns is the face of Fox Sports NRL. A fan favourite and comic genius, Johns also has one of the best minds in rugby league. Johns is a highly sought-after coach who has worked behind the scenes with stars like Cooper Cronk. Brother to Immortal Andrew, Johns now has two NRL playing sons with Jack and Cooper both debuting this year. PHELPS

16 GAI WATERHOUSE Age: 66 Racehorse trainer Source of power: Gai Waterhouse is racing's most recognisable figure. She transcends the sport and is so famous, she is widely known by her first name. She had a varied career in the media and arts until 1992 when she followed her famous father, Tommy Smith, and became a licensed racehorse trainer. Waterhouse is arguably the greatest female trainer the world has seen and has 144 Group 1 wins to her credit. Waterhouse has trained the winners of most of the nation's biggest races including a record seven Golden Slippers, seven Doncasters, seven Epsom Handicaps, Melbourne Cup and Caulfield Cup. She was elected into the Australian Racing Hall of Fame in 2007, the Australian Sporting Hall of Fame in 2018 and has been named an "Australian Living Treasure" by the National Trust of Australia. THOMAS

15 ASH BARTY Age: 24 World No.1 women's tennis player Source of power: As former Wimbledon doubles champion Todd Woodbridge said, Barty is the champion not only Australian tennis had been searching for but Australian sport as well. Cricket, swimming and the football codes and tennis itself all had image problems but Barty, the unpretentious World No.1 from Ipswich, has risen above the pack to shine as a wholesome star and a throwback to eras when that was the norm. Her influence reaches many corners of society due her Indigenous roots and the fact she overcame mental health issues, which saw her temporarily quit the sport. Tennis Australia used her to promote a campaign designed to entice girls to play sport beyond their teenage years when she said "people used to say I was too short to play". Many world No.1s retreat to tax havens but when not on the circuit she swiftly retreats to her house and dogs at Springfield. CRADDOCK

14 ANDREW ABDO Age: 43 NRL CEO Source of power: Todd Greenberg's successor, Abdo was appointed as the NRL's full-time CEO after successfully navigating rugby league through the COVID-19 crisis as the game's interim boss. South African born and raised, Abdo, 43, is a chartered accountant who worked for Deloitte in Johannesburg and Bermuda before moving to Sydney. Regarded as having one of the best commercial brains in Australian sport, Abdo has been guaranteed full operational control of the billion-dollar sport that is rugby league.

PHELPS

13 KATIE PAGE Age: 64 NRL sponsor and women's sport advocate Source of power: Head of the NRL's second biggest commercial partner, Harvey Norman CEO Page has grown to become the third-most-powerful person in rugby league. The driving force behind the NRLW, Page became the first woman to be elected onto the NRL board in 2004. There are few decisions made in league that don't have her blessing. PHELPS

12 JUSTIN LANGER Age: 50 Australian cricket coach Source of power: Australia's cricket coach, also a national selector, has had a major influence over the current side after hauling the team's cultural standards out of the sewer they tumbled in to during the Cape Town ball-tampering scandal. Passionate and intense, he likes cricketers who are similar to himself - hardworking, fit and with strong ethical values. Langer's Australia teams have generally maintained the difficult balance of maintaining a robust on-field presence without reverting to the grubbiness of the previous era. Had a rugged start but kept the faith in himself and the system, and the team and the man himself are now far more settled. CRADDOCK

11 CRAIG TILEY Age: 58 CEO, Tennis Australia Source of power: Tiley, more than anyone else, has been the driver behind transforming the Australian Open from a poor cousin of the other grand slams into Australia's biggest annual single sporting event. More than 700,000 spectators now attend each year, while the worldwide TV audience has grown to over 350 million. It delivers more than $300 million into the Australian economy and creates in excess of 4500 permanent and part-time jobs. He revitalised the tournament through listening closely to what the players want, so counts Roger Federer, Serena Williams, Rafael Nadal and Novak Djokovic as his buddies. A strong advocate for gender equity, the Australian Open was the second tournament to offer equal prize money. Tiley has rebranded it as Asia's grand slam - allowing Tennis Australia to develop a bigger footprint in the world's most populated region - and convince the government to invest $900m in redeveloping Melbourne Park into the best tennis facility in the world.LINDEN CONTINUED PAGES 68-69

10 JAMES WARBURTON Age: 50 Seven West Media chief executive Source of power: The man in charge of the free-to-air broadcast rights for AFL and international cricket flexed his muscle over winter by negotiating heavily reduced deals with both codes. While an overwhelming majority of AFL fans say they want a traditional 2.30pm Grand Final - after this year's COVID-enforced experiment at the Gabba - Warburton and co will have the biggest say on whether the thirst for ratings wins out and the AFL permanently shifts to a twilight or night-time decider. The network has publicly savaged Cricket Australia over its Test, one-day and Big Bash scheduling and the success of this summer could have dramatic ramifications on the future of Australia's national sport. The early departure of Indian superstar Virat Kohli won't help. WARNER

9 WAYNE BENNETT Age: 70 NRL coach Source of power: Written off as a past-his-prime geriatric after a COVID-19 breach where he claimed to have been confused by the NRL's quarantine rules, Bennett confirmed himself as a coaching genius when he masterminded the biggest shock in State of Origin history. Queensland's giant-killing 2020 series win over NSW is the latest triumph in a career that has produced seven premiership crowns with two separate clubs. The 70-year-old has huge influence across rugby league, with his advice sought for major decisions in the game. PHELPS

8 PATRICK DELANY Foxtel chief executive Source of power: During a seven-year stint as boss of Fox Sports, which ended in 2018 when he became CEO of the Foxtel Group, Delany was the driving force behind the reshaping of Australia's sports broadcast landscape, a key figure behind every major sports deal over the past 10 years. He oversaw the introduction of Fox Footy and Fox League and helped create the Big Bash League in partnership with Cricket Australia in 2011. Delany changed the look of Fox Sports, endorsed magazine shows that humanised and broadened interest in codes, and helped to bring almost every major sport in Australia to Fox despite plenty of spirited rights negotiations that were never as routine as they sounded. A lively public speaker, he encouraged his commentators to have a crack, once saying at a season launch: "If I am going to put a microphone in front of you, I want you to say something." More recently he was the key architect of the Kayo streaming service, a digital disruption of Foxtel that now has huge popular traction with a new generation of sports fans that never had Foxtel. CRADDOCK

7 MICHAEL MILLER Age: 51 News Corp Australia executive chairman Source of power: Raised in the Hunter Valley, Miller's first love of media started as a boy reading sports results in The Muswellbrook Chronicle. Decades later he is the man with a big say in Australia over News Corp's digital, publishing and broadcast sporting empire. His influence stretches to all corners of the sporting spectrum - from being a shadow across the negotiating table when Fox Sports won the cricket rights in 2018, to one-on-one discussions with Wayne Bennett in his tumultuous final days as Broncos coach, to reassuring country readers that a switch from paper to digital publication would enhance rather than tarnish their local sport coverage. Renowned for his measured demeanour, Miller's role at News Corp is much broader than sport but sport remains a key part of it and no major decision is made without passing his desk. He has sat on boards ranging from realestate.com.au to Waratahs Rugby.

CRADDOCK

6 DUSTIN MARTIN Age: 29 Richmond AFL star Source of power: The biggest name in Australian domestic sport and the closest thing we've had to English soccer legend David Beckham, minus the pop star wife. Kids want to play like him, grown drunk men adopt his haircut, sponsors clamour to sign him and every rival club wishes he wore their jumper. Not many footballers of any code get to sip cocktails in the Maldives with Serena Williams or to leave their car in the MCG basement carpark for weeks after yet another premiership salute. Three flags and three Norm Smith Medals stamp him as arguably the greatest AFL finals player in history and at 29 there's plenty of top-end footy left in Dusty. Turns heads in the NRL states and helped Richmond break a 37-year run of misery to become the biggest sporting club in the land with more than 100,000 members. WARNER

5 SAM KERR Age: 27 Australian women's soccer captain.

With admirers stretching from Serena Williams down to young fans - including boys - seen wearing her jersey, the Matildas captain's rise has embodied the spectacular surge of women's sport in Australia. With her incredible skillset and multicultural background, she represents many parts of Australia and has taken women's soccer to a level of popularity that was unthinkable even a decade ago. Her backflip goalscoring celebrations have both showcased her star quality and freakish athleticism which last year saw her voted one of the best female soccer players in the world. She has just signed a deal to do six children's books claiming she wanted to inspire Australian kids to chase their dreams. CRADDOCK

4 GILLON MCLACHLAN Age: 47 AFL chief executive Source of power: Polo playing, racehorse-owning boss of Australia's biggest domestic sport - the code that draws the largest crowds and pockets the richest broadcast deals. Navigated the game through the COVID crisis, a task made harder by the emergency exodus of 10 teams from the Victorian heartland and the added complication of negotiating border control rules with six different states. As the biggest code with the most to lose, McLachlan oversaw the league's response to the financial crisis, reducing what loomed as a potential $1b hit into an estimated $100m loss, notwithstanding savage cost and job cuts. Struck a deal with the Queensland government on the eve of a state election that saved the season. The arrival of Peter V'landys has been a game changer in the code wars and his rugby league counterpart read the play better, boldly restarting his competition two weeks earlier and locking away an extended pay-TV deal with Foxtel. Entering his seventh season in the hot seat, McLachlan's remains the most visible figure in Australian rules.

WARNER

3 TIM PAINE Age: 35 Australian Test cricket captain.

Source of power: The most unexpected saviour in Australian sporting history. Became Australian captain midway through the ball-tampering Test in Cape Town and his sturdy temperament guided his ship through this nation's greatest cricket controversy. When Australian cricket was wobbling on its moral axis two summers ago in a losing series against India he was the lone cool head among team bosses. His rousing yet composed dressing-room speech to an Australian team that lost a Test due to a Ben Stokes 'miracle' at Headingley last year was one of the finest by an Australian captain and his team duly rebounded to retain the Ashes. Australia owes him much. Selectors had traditionally thought keepers should not be made captains due to their high work level but they had little choice when appointing Paine and he has handled the two roles exceptionally well. CRADDOCK

2 JOHN COATES Age: 70 Australian Olympic Committee president and International Olympic Committee vice-president Source of power: No Australian wields as much influence on global sport as Coates. As the second-highest ranking official in the Olympic movement, Coates has the power to persuade sport's most powerful executives and captains of industry, as well as major political leaders and even members of royal families. A lawyer by profession, Coates is also the president of the Court of Arbitration for Sport and has a knack for getting his wishes. It was Coates who made the inspired decision to pick Cathy Freeman to light the cauldron at the 2000 Sydney Olympics. He's a mover and shaker on a stack of high-powered committees, including the bid team to bring the Rugby World Cup back to Australia in 2027. But his biggest goal right now is to ensure Brisbane wins the hosting rights for the 2032 Olympics and Paralympics. If the world's biggest multi-sports event comes back, you can bet it'll all be down to the power of Coates. LINDEN CONTINUED PAGE 67 - See article "1 THE SAVIOUR OF SPORT IN 2020" for article on 1. Peter V'landys