Veterans still in the firing line THE Morrison Government's treatment of our war veterans is more than disgusting (The real 'brutal' truth - Alan Jones, 11/2). What a coward's way to sneakily change the Meritorious Unit Citation's status to suit one's own agenda, then to treat them all as criminals is beyond comprehension.

 I have voted Liberal most of my life, but no more will I vote for the LINOs (Liberals In Name Only).

Glenn O'Sullivan, Kanwal

Thank you Alan Jones (The real 'brutal' truth, 11/2), "if the government cares nothing for our veterans, why should the voter care for the government?" That's a perfect question, and not only concerning veterans.

 The government is far too happy to kowtow to the noisy, activist Left while throwing the innocent majority under the bus. Amazing how the top brass in the army escape scrutiny. Equally amazing is that I never saw any of the top brass in the banking inquiry held to account.

 One rule for the upper echelon and activists, another rule for the average voter who put you in office.

Robyn Moase, Ettalong

Clayton's call from WHO investigation We now know from the WHO investigation into the COVID-19 virus that they have found nothing (Coronavirus cover-up, 11/2).

 Apparently it doesn't come from Wuhan wet markets or from laboratory leaks but the scientific experts think that it could be from bats or from some frozen foods imported from other countries ... seriously!

 It's just another cover-up from a country that thrives on blaming everyone except themselves and a WHO that is as useless as it gets.

 This was a Clayton's investigation from the start.

Nev, Menai

Saving face The report by the World Health Organisation on the origins of COVID-19 does little for the credibility or reputation of the scientists involved or the institution itself (Coronavirus cover-up, 11/2).

 It is undeniable that this report was concluded in haste, shallow and vague enough to save face for the Chinese Government.

 This brings the question as to what extent have segments of the scientific community compromised their science and reputation?

 The general public is asked to "trust the science" and believe in the scientists - WHO's Clayton's Wuhan report does nothing to help us trust or believe.

Bruce Collison, Banks, ACT

Flights of fancy The WHO investigation into the Chinese Wuhan virus was unnecessary (Coronavirus cover-up, 11/2). All one has to be reminded of was the fact that the Chinese Government banned all domestic airline flights from Wuhan to any other city in China.

 But they allowed international flights to proceed as normal. Charles Gates, Hornsby

A work in progress Federal Labor leader Anthony Albanese's labour reforms are excellent and will cost business a large amount of money, but the long-term trend in our country has been towards more insecure casual work which undermines living standards, is disruptive to people and should be corrected (The gig is up for job proposal, 11/2).

 Business understandably seeks flexibility and efficiency, but CEOs have relatively secure and consistent jobs, as do politicians, public servants and professionals.  It's time exploitation of all types ended.

Rod Matthews, Fairfield, Vic

Age-old problem Given the current debate regarding the JobSeeker allowance, there is one issue that no-one talks about - the older JobSeeker.

 The bottom line is, if you are older (above 60), you have no chance of getting sustainable employment. No one wants you.  This hasn't improved with the Government incentives for employers to hire under 35s. You can't get a job and can't get the pension until you are 67.5 years old.

 The federal Government needs to introduce a JobSeeker supplement payment of around $300 per fortnight for the over 60s, who have paid tax all their lives, had little access to superannuation and are the ignored community.

Grant Errington, Ashfield

Elements of truth If Dan "the Man" Andrew believes he has the Gold Standard of controlling COVID, our Glad must have Platinum Plus (Virus hits Vic hubris on hotels, 10/2).

 I was prepared to give him the benefit of the doubt with his handling of the hard lockdown because of the numbers of deaths and I felt very sorry for our southern neighbours.

 But now I am questioning him when he spruiks the Gold Standard in controlling his State. He has one confirmed case, locks down his State for one day and then opens up so a tennis tournament can go ahead.  Players from around the world are allowed into his State but he will not up his numbers to Australians wanting to come home.

 Now his COVID numbers are rising. Yep Dan "the Man" Andrews you have the Gold Standard of stupidity, or is it just electioneering.

Barbara Thompson, Newington

Chapter and verse Gary Halloran (Letters, 11/2) made the assertion that the HSC is a mechanism for grading a student's ability in "understanding the texts studied throughout the course", specifically in the subject of English.  I contend that the English HSC exam is there to assess not only what the student understands from Year 11 and Year 12 texts but to display their understanding of the English language, which they should have been learning for some 13 years.

 If a student sits for a HSC Maths exam but has no idea about long division, fractions, or any of the basic arithmetic methodology, then higher level mathematics might prove to be beyond them.

 The HSC should be an affirmation of a holistic education which would set the student up for the future.

John Dobija, Seaham

Majority rules Great article (It's not just McGuire, 11/2) from Andrew Bolt exposing the hypocrisy of the woke Left. Jacqui Lambie asks the same question: "Why do we keep bending over for the minority?"  The answer is that our politicians and business leaders are weak and lack the conviction to take on the minority Left, so it was a pleasing surprise to see Greg Hunt call out ABC 'journalist' Michael Rowland for his obvious left-leaning political bias. A tip for politicians wanting to succeed: there are many more votes to be had by siding with the majority. Silence and sitting on the fence is just not good enough.

Mitchell Beston, Woy Woy

Masking the issue I travel on public transport every day and am amazed at the number of people not wearing masks or not wearing them correctly.

 Most schoolchildren over 12 don't wear masks on public transport. I have also noticed many staff in cafes and takeaways who are serving customers and not wearing masks.  When is the government going to come down hard on these people and start fining them? It would be interesting to know how many fines have been issued to people for not wearing masks.

Stephen Totham, Wentworthville

Briefly ...

The year of the Ox? Maybe for China it should be the year of the Oxymoron. David Lambert, Berry

* * * I have a solution to the graffiti problem. If someone is caught doing graffiti the punishment should be a tattoo of an opponent's tag on the forehead.

John Stuart, St Fillans

* * * Wot. Tork about the pot corling the kettal blak Tony Wilkinson (Briefly, 11/2). Its consentrayt not consentrait. Lurn the kwenes Inglisch.

Glenn Balcombe, Oatlands

HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001