I am not a China basher and think that a lot of the flak that gets directed to our most powerful Asian neighbour often stems from fears and suspicions that are -rooted in prejudice. The modern-day economic success of Australia has been inextricably linked to the economic growth of China.

The balance is skewed heavily in our favour, too, with the -Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade recording that in 2018-19 Australian exported $134 billion in goods and services to China and imported just $78 -billion. But the growing tensions between Beijing and Canberra over our government's support for an independent inquiry into the origin and management of COVID-19 in China's Hubei province should serve as a reminder of an important truth.  Australia is a democracy, China is not. Australia values transparency. China does not.

And some things matter more than money - especially a pandemic that has killed more than 200,000 worldwide.

The manner in which Beijing has responded to the very suggestion of an inquiry says a fair bit about the political character of the nation. The way China is behaving right now is nothing short of a disgrace. It is eminently possible that China is responsible for destroying Australian lives and much of the Australian economy on account of its handling of the coronavirus outbreak, and now audaciously threatens to do us more harm as a result of us supporting an independent inquiry into how this pandemic started.

If ever you needed a demonstration of the political values guiding our two countries, this is it. China's diplomats have engaged in the opposite of diplomacy when it comes to the mooted coronavirus inquest, opting instead to bully us with dark threats our beef industry and the wine industry will be targeted if Australia "singles out" China for scrutiny.

The idea of "singling out" China is a bizarre one. No one is "singling out" China for any other reason than the virus actually originated there, in circumstances that deserve thorough and independent scrutiny.

There is a real risk that China might find itself isolated as a -result of its actions if it continues to behave in its current belligerent fashion. Chinese ambassador to Australia Cheng Jingye has massively overplayed his hand by threatening retaliation.

It is offensive and tasteless stand-over stuff that does him or his nation no benefit. Cheng is not alone, either. There have been instances this past month in Brazil, Iran, Singapore and in a number of European countries where Chinese diplomats have been acting like a bunch of Twitter trolls, bagging their host nations for having the temerity to question China's management of this outbreak.

It has been good to see the -extent to which Canberra is sticking to its guns on this question.Until such a time as China is a democracy, or at the very least a more benign one-party state, its hostility towards criticism and -opposition to transparency will be a recurring challenge in our economic relationship.