WHO TAKES BEIJING'S SIDE IN HASTY COVID INQUIRY 5 years Length of Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sex Abuse 10 months Length of Warren Commission investigation into JFK's assassination 12 days World Health Organisation on-ground team's investigation into the origins of COVID-19 pandemic THE World Health Organisation's hurried report into the origins of the coronavirus was slammed as an "unsatisfactory" whitewash designed to protect the Chinese government from embarrassment, just hours after handing down its findings.

Speaking in China on Tuesday night, WHO investigators dismissed the possibility that the virus may have escaped from the controversial Wuhan Institute of Vir-ology while leaving the door open to the possibility that the virus may have been imported from another country.

Peter Embarek, one of the scientists who made up the delegation, said finding the origin of COVID was a "work in progress".

But he said COVID-19 most likely made the jump to humans through an unknown animal source.

The theory that the virus may have escaped from a local lab where scientists were known to be conducting "gain of function" tests on -viruses similar to the coronavirus was dismissed out of hand as "extremely unlikely", according to Embarek.

But more needs to be known before the possibility can be dismissed, according to a number of scientists and experts critical of China's handling of the pandemic.

"It's unsatisfactory, dismissing possibilities without providing evidence for why," said vaccine researcher Prof Nikolai Petrovski, who is the Director of Endocrinology at Flinders University Medical Centre in South Australia.

"They seem to have signed up to the Chinese government's position, which is that this didn't come from China, and that it might have come in to China on frozen food packaging. Why are they -saying that and what is the evidence?" "We are entitled to the facts they are using to dismiss different possibilities, and to know if they have dealt with the question marks around how the virus got this feature or that feature." Others were similarly sceptical.

"The WHO mission is compromised because Beijing is choreographing the team's visit. And the delegation -includes some China apologists," academic and author Clive Hamilton, who has written a number of books detailing the efforts of the Chinese Communist Party to subvert democracy in Australia and around the world, told The Daily Telegraph.

"It already looks like the WHO delegation is following Beijing's script." UNSW Professor Raina MacIntyre also said it was "expected" the WHO investigators would rule out the lab as where COVID-19 started, but that didn't mean it was the case.

"They do not provide any evidence for dismissing a lab leak," she said. Since the beginning of the pandemic, the Chinese government has tightly controlled information about the virus that could be embarrassing to the authoritarian regime, and suggested the virus might have been brought to Wuhan by visiting American military athletes or even on the surface of imported frozen food packaging.

China has also sought to punish Australian exporters by imposing billions of dollars worth of trade sanctions in retaliation for the Morrison government's pressing for an investigation into the -pandemic.

Nationals Senator Matt Canavan lashed the process, suggesting that any report into the virus delivered on Chinese soil was immediately compromised.

"It's a bit hard to believe the conclusions of this report when if the WHO had made certain findings, they may have been detained before -getting out of the country," he said.

"If journalists expressing views aren't safe in China, how can you expect health officials to be safe either?" Other Coalition MPs were just as scathing, with one -telling The Daily Telegraph it was "premature" to rule out the lab hypothesis "before they have found clear evidence of an alternative cause".

From the start, the WHO's investigation has been marred by controversy, with the Chinese government first delaying authorisation for the visit, and then tightly man-aging access for the inter-national delegation.

Despite the WHO's report, the theory that COVID-19's origins lie behind the gates of the secretive Wuhan Institute of Virology have gained currency in -recent days after being widely rubbished as a Donald Trump-style conspiracy theory when The Daily Telegraph reported on it last year.  Last week, the Washington Post published a blistering editorial saying that "the possibility of a laboratory -accident or leak … must be -investigated ... Wuhan (has) at least six facilities with BSL-3 laboratories for handling infectious agents," the paper's editorial board wrote. And, soon after the WHO handed down its report, former US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo told Fox News in an interview: "I continue to know that there was significant evidence that this may well have come from that -laboratory."