THE Seven Network's stoush with Cricket Australia could have major ramifications for the NRL as the broadcaster prepares to launch a stunning bid to steal State of Origin - and potentially the premiership - from bitter rival the Nine Network.

Seven has threatened to walk away from its deal with Cricket Australia, having labelled the organisation a "train wreck" and branded its administration as "stumbling, bumbling" and "incompetent".

If Seven does tear up its contract, it would free up about $100 million a year. That would leave Seven with the financial artillery to make a charge at rugby league's commercial broadcasting rights, which are up for grabs from 2023.

While the NRL recently extended its deal with Foxtel until the end of 2027, the Nine Network dug in its heels, leaving the commercial rights vulnerable to a potential bid from Seven or Ten.

Sources close to Seven confirmed the network was already sizing up an offer for Origin and that could extend to the premiership, depending on its financial situation in the new year.

It is understood Seven powerbrokers have also had informal talks with Foxtel over a sharing arrangement that could result in Origin being simulcast from 2023, when the NRL's deal with the Nine Network is due to expire.

Seven is in the process of selling assets to strengthen its bottom line and it is understood it has urged the ARL Commission to wait until the new year to begin talks with commercial broadcasters.

The commission and the NRL are in no rush. They occupy a position of strength thanks to their deal with Foxtel, the five-year extension alone worth around $1 billion.

With that contract in their back pocket, they can take their time and pit the commercial broadcasters against each other.

Nine is believed to be keen to retain rugby league, but chief executive Hugh Marks (pictured) is a shrewd operator and will want to pay as little as possible to keep the code.

Ratings have been sluggish on Nine this year, although that can in part be explained away by the form of the Brisbane Broncos.

The game's flagship club has been a constant on Nine, a decision that was made during the COVID-19 break when the broadcasters were given more say over the scheduling of matches.

At the time, the Broncos were unbeaten through two games. When rugby league returned from the COVID-19 break, Nine's ratings reached record numbers.

Since then, they have stagnated largely because of the form of the Broncos, who have lost 13 out of 14 games and suffered a series of shellackings. - THE AUSTRALIAN