SAINT JAKE Friend's comeback to win three premierships and captain the Roosters after being deregistered and having his contract torn up in 2009 is one of the game's most inspiring stories. This guy should be employed in the NRL welfare department.

He should tell his tale to every youngster in the game that you can stuff up in life but still make the most of a second chance.

SINNER SHARKS/Newtown prop Andrew Fifita floored Canberra five-eighth Matt Frawley with a vicious high shot in Canterbury Cup last week. Somehow the NSWRL judiciary decided it was only a grade-one dangerous contact. He misses ZERO games. In the NRL he would have copped a minimum four weeks.

SHOOSH THE NRL remains fully committed to introducing a 17th team in Brisbane for 2023 despite constant talk there aren't enough quality players for an extra team. There is more concern at NRL headquarters about the AFL's growth in Brisbane in TV ratings and participation since the city hosted the 2020 AFL finals during the COVID-19 crisis.

SPOTTED Warring footy bosses Peter V'landys and Gil McLachlan finally came face to face at Randwick yesterday at The Championships ... and it wasn't in the carpark. McLachlan was there as a guest of NSW stadiums boss and GWS chairman Tony Shepherd. The pair eventually saw eye to eye but only when V'landys jumped on a chair.

SPOTTED DON'T worry about James Tedesco v Ryan Papenhuyzen when Melbourne Storm play the Sydney Roosters next weekend. The best storyline is Coach Cronk v Consultant Cronk. What will he tell Sam Walker about Jahrome Hughes? And what will he tell Hughes about Walker?

SPOTTED PENRITH and Queensland Origin star Kurt Capewell among a huge cheer squad from Ipswich to watch 18-year-old Sam Walker's debut at the SCG last week.

SPOTTED WHAT a difference 12 months can make on a healthy diet and good exercise plan. Radio 2GB broadcaster Ray Hadley looks 100 in the photo on the left before the benefits of a better lifestyle kicked in. Hadley has lost 20kg and his belt size has shrunk from 42 to 34.