Australia needs to sharpen up its understanding of how Xi Jinping plays the game Australia is a child -playing chess against China the grand -master. When it comes to negotiations between Australia and China and the current spat, there are a few strategic differences between our nations that could explain why Australia is not coming out on top.

One of the two biggest differences are that Australians are direct in their communication behaviours and often pride themselves in calling a 'spade a spade' and our political structure -encourages short-term thinking with Australian states and federal parliaments limited to terms of three to four years.

On the other hand, Chinese culture employs indirect communication behaviours and takes a long-term view of things. How much "face" is lost or gained in communication is critical to decision making in China, alongside the solidity of their "guanxi" - or business relationships.

We are indeed in a game of chess with the masters and if we want any chance of winning, we need to understand the Chinese culture. The best way to do that is to get a grip on Sun Tzu's famous text The Art of War and the 36 Chinese strategies that are outlined in it.

During 2020 China has applied several of the 36 Chinese Strategies on Australia following Prime Minister Morrison's public call for the inquiry into the origins of the COVID-19 pandemic. These strategies are deeply embedded in Chinese politics, business, and trade, and across all facets of everyday life.

In the last application, China used Strategy Two - "Besiege Wei to rescue Zhao", which is used when you want to attack something your opponent holds dear. In this situation, Australia's good reputation across the globe is something that is held close to the heart of the Australia psyche.

We often perceive ourselves as a small country punching above our weight contributing positively to global affairs. It is against this image of ourselves that China has applied Strategy Two, seeking to damage our reputation and standing outside China when it used Twitter to show a fake image of an Australian soldier holding a knife at the neck of an -Afghan child.

The application of Strategy Two worked as planned because it pressed Australia's emotional buttons. As much as this photograph was, terrible the most appropriate way to respond to this strategy is calmly and strategically as opposed to emotionally.

This year China has also applied Strategy Twenty - "Trouble the water to catch the fish" - by announcing they would urge their citizens not to travel to Australia because of the supposed rise in racism against -Chinese people.

This strategy is used to create confusion. Instead of acting in a very reactive manner, we could have thought through the reality of this advice and realised this was not logical. Rather it was a successful strategic move on China's part to create confused reactions within Australia.

In August, Wang Xining, the deputy Head of Mission at China's embassy to Australia, used Strategy Thirty-Two - "The strategy of open city gates", which is a deliberate display of vulnerability. He addressed the National Press Club and in that speech he revealed the depth of China's hurt at Australia's focus on Wuhan as the source of the COVID-19 pandemic. It was the very public and direct manner in which Australia called for the international investigation into the origin of COVID-19 that has resulted in China "losing face", which is the hurt that Wang Xining referred to.

Wang Xining's speech was an invitation to understand China's concerns so Australia and China might be able to repair their relationship. Had we been able to listen through the filter of the 36 Chinese Strategies, we might have realised Wang Xining was inviting us to see the situation from China's point of view.

The only way forward for Australia is to understand Chinese culture. Australia has too much to lose to keep using our outrage and our Western negotiation approaches.

We are children playing chess with Chinese grand masters. Leonie McKeon is an expert on Chinese negotiation techniques. leoniemckeon.com