THE US has slammed the Chinese- government for trying to hack its research into a coronavirus- vaccine.

US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo yesterday called on Beijing to "cease this malicious activity". "The United States condemns attempts- by cyber actors and non-traditional collectors- affiliated- with the People's Republic- of China to steal US intellectual property and data related to COVID-19 research," Mr Pompeo (pictured) said.

The FBI and Department of Homeland Security had earlier warned of the cyber espionage attempts on US scientists.

"The potential theft of this information jeopardises the delivery of secure, effective, and efficient treatment options," the FBI said.

Mr Pompeo said China's "behaviour in cyberspace is an extension of its counter-productive- actions throughout the COVID-19 pandemic".

"While the US and our allies- and partners are co-ordinating a collective, transparent response to save lives, the PRC continues to silence scientists, journalists and citizens, and to spread disinformation, which has exacerbated the dangers of this health crisis," Mr Pompeo said.

The cyber warning comes after China has been accused of covering up the origin of the coronavirus and delaying warning the world it was contagious so they could stockpile medical supplies. Australia and the US are among the nations calling for an independent investigation- into how COVID-19 spread from Wuhan to the world, infecting more than 4.3 million and killing 300,000 people.

Beijing yesterday denied responsibility for the cyber attacks. "China expresses strong dissatisfaction and firm opposition to such smearing," foreign ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian said. "Judging from past records, the US has carried out the largest cybertheft operations worldwide." The coronavirus has plunged relations between Washington and China to new lows, with US President Donald- Trump hinting this week at withdrawing from a recent trade deal.

"We got a lot of things going with China. We're not happy about China - I will tell you that," Mr Trump said yesterday at the White House."The ink wasn't dry on a great trade deal and, all of a sudden, the plague comes in from China. We're not happy about it."