FALLEN Broncos coach Anthony Seibold is ramping up his cyber-bullying probe - the names of three NRL-related people all based in Sydney have been supplied to the NRL integrity unit.

Seibold's legal team has sent a dossier to the NRL after the ex-Broncos coach hired a team of European cybersecurity experts to investigate a slew of defamatory attacks on him on social-media platforms.

That dossier includes three names with links to the NRL. Seibold was given a long list of names, some members of the public he has never heard of, but the NRL-related figures were individuals he recognised.

It means if Seibold chooses to forge ahead with his case, which he plans to do, then he will have to ask NSW police to join Queensland police in investigating the slurs. It is understood an ongoing legal battle for Seibold will cost him in excess of $50,000, money he is prepared to outlay to bring change to social-media legislation in Australia and ensure protection on social-media platforms.

Seibold does not plan to publicly name and shame the NRL-related names he recognises, but he wants to pursue the matter privately through the NRL integrity unit and the legal system. But if the matter ends up in the courts, the names of Seibold's attackers are certain to be released.

" " " A PLANNED Test between New Zealand and Tonga has been scrapped. There was talk of a three-Test series during Origin at the end of the year but because of the uncertainty surrounding COVID-19, there will be no international league played in Australia this year.

" " " BENJI Marshall won't be reunited with younger brother Jeremy at the Bulldogs. The club has ruled out making a play for the 35-year-old. Marshall wants to play on next year.

" " " THE sporting community has rallied to support the Red Cross Beirut Appeal following the devastating explosion last month. Robbie Farah, Mitch Moses, Josh Mansour, Billy Dib, Andrew Nabbout, Tarek Elrich, Moudi Najjar plus The Telegraph's Fatima Kdouh have launched a campaign calling for help. To donate: redcross.org.au/beirut.