JUST WHAT DOES THE FUTURE HOLD FOR SPORT IN 2021? BUZZ ROTHFIELD PEERS INTO THE CRYSTAL BALL FOR HIS PREDICTIONS

STORM TROOPERS No Cameron Smith, no worries.

Not when you've got the best hooker in the world to replace him, the 22-year-old Harry Grant.

Of all things Storm will miss is Smith's leadership. Yet they've got the NRL's best player, Origin hero and five-eighth Cameron Munster, to steer this side around the park.

The best indication of their extraordinary strength of the park is our recent top 50 player list.

They had four in the top 12 - Cameron Munster, Ryan Papenhuyzen, Grant and Josh Addo-Carr. Plus another six - Jesse Bromwich, Jahrome Hughes, Brandon Smith, Nelson Asofa-Solomona, Chris Welch and Felise Kaufusi.

Dale Finucane and Justin Olam wouldn't have been out of place in the list either. The one query is their preparation and being ready for the opening round. Coach Craig Bellamy has given the entire squad until January 4 to return to training.

THE QUINELLA We're tipping South Sydney Rabbitohs to replace Penrith Panthers in the grand final.

You add Jai Arrow to the middle and play Cameron Murray on an edge where he is best suited. Plus they'll have Latrell Mitchell settled in at fullback and hopefully injury free.

They will want to send out the old supercoach Wayne Bennett a winner.

ORIGIN DOUBLE The 'worst Queensland team in 40 years' are a huge hope of winning back-to-back State of Origin crowns. When you add David Fifita and Kalyn Ponga to the Maroons outfit that defeated the Blues, they are going to be awfully hard to beat.

BIGGEST IMPROVER There is no question the Gold Coast Titans will be in the top eight. Any side that adds David Fifita and Tino Fa'asuamaleaui to one that won five straight at the end of the season could even be a top-four hope. Their coach Justin Holbrook, a great operator, has added highly regarded strength and conditioning coach Klint Hoare as high-performance manager.

THE SPOON We know the Broncos are going to improve under Kevin Walters and hand over the most unwanted 'prize' in the game to another club.

We're thinking the Cowboys. This is no reflection on new coach Todd Payten, who did such a wonderful job as a caretaker with New Zealand's Warriors. It's just the Cowboys showed little this year to finish 14th with just five wins under a good coach in Paul Green. They are paying $2 million from their cap on Michael Morgan and Valentine Holmes, both of whom offered little last season.

It could be a battle between the Cowboys and the Wests Tigers at the bottom. Michael Maguire won't be in a position to lift his side until big-money players Russell Packer and Moses Mbye are off contract to free up salary cap space.

HAPLESS HOOKER Damien Cook's brief Test career is under threat and through no fault of his own. Harry Grant looks like the Test hooker for the next decade. He's a phenomenal talent and a really decent young man.

AGE SHALL NOT WEARY HIM Wayne Bennett gets towards the end of next season and realises he's too young to retire and starts angling for another coaching gig. After his effort with the Maroons in State of Origin, there is interest out there for him. However, we're tipping there will be an announcement about a second Brisbane team midway through the year and Bennett will become the face of the new franchise that will be ready to play in 2023.

COMEBACK 1 Jack Bird's career has been a write-off since he joined the Broncos three years ago. A return to his junior club St George Illawarra will see Bird finally play some football and show us the player who helped the Sharks win the 2016 premiership.

COMEBACK II Ryan James' signing might prove to be the most astute for 2021. I know he's coming off serious knee injuries, but James was pushing Origin selection a few years ago at the Titans and he joins a dominant Raiders pack. A fit and firing James will be dynamic alongside Josh Papalii.

OPEN AND SHUT CASE Despite concussion issues, Will Pucovski will establish himself as David Warner's Test opening partner and the new rising star of Australian cricket. They will form a great pairing.

JOINING BRADMAN Steve Smith has 26 Test centuries and I'm backing him in to score three more and join Sir Donald Bradman on 29 this year.

RADIO ACTIVE It's a big year for rugby league radio ratings. 2GB have dominated for a long period but losing Erin Molan is a huge blow, just 12 months after Continuous Call legends Ray Hadley and Bozo Fulton pulled the pin. There's not much opposition from the ABC but there's a new player in town, SEN, plus Triple M, who had great figures in the final survey of the footy season.

OUR BEN STOKES Cameron Green has made his ODI debut, but he will really make his mark as the all-rounder Australia has craved for decades. We have looked on with envy at Ben Stokes, but Green bowls 145km/h and they say he bats like Kevin Pietersen. That's a handy combo.

BOWLED GARRY Nathan Lyon (left) could get to 400 wickets in the second Test against India, confirming his place as the second-greatest Australian spinner behind Shane Warne. Only 33, Lyon will challenge Glenn McGrath's total of 563 Test wickets.

ROAD TO REVENGE Shame we've got to wait until Round 22 to see new Dragons coach Anthony Griffin tackle the Panthers, the club that sacked him before their chairman Dave "Uncle Nick" O'Neill signed Ivan Cleary.

GO GIRLS Who would have thought female jockeys would dominate racing like Rachel King and Jamie Kah? They are both outstanding riders with the strength and skill to match their male counterparts. They will make an even bigger impact in 2021 in Sydney and Melbourne racing.

QUEEN OF POOL Our 20-year-old rising superstar Ariarne Titmus has already beaten American legend Katy Ledecky once in the 400m freestyle. Delaying the Olympics for 12 months will only mean Ariarne is stronger and hungrier to take gold.

It will be one of the great head-to-head battles in Tokyo.

THE SISTERS A hope as much as a prediction, but let's cheer on Cate and Bronte Campbell as they sign off on their Olympic careers on the dais together after the 4x100m freestyle relay, with the team defending their Rio gold.

POOL PARTY Projections in a virtual 2020 Olympics had our swimmers giving England a bath and winning close to 20 medals in the pool. Our Olympic swimming trials are in June, but it is shaping as a great Olympics for Mack Horton now that the drugs controversy finally caught up with rival Sun Yang.

BOOMERS AT LAST After finishing fourth in four previous Olympics, it's time for Patty Mills and the boys to get their hands on that elusive medal. How COVID-19 affects the NBA and the Olympics remain a mystery - but it just might play into our hands.

BOARD GAMES Surfing will be one of the most popular event for Australians as it makes its Olympic debut. My fearless prediction is Steph Gilmore and Sally Fitzgibbons will end up competing against each other for a medal.

RUNNING MATES NSW's Jessica Hull is an emerging star of Australian track and field, breaking the national 5000m record which had stood for 18 years. She also took three seconds off the 3000m national record. She will breakthrough and make the 1500m final in Tokyo. Look out for Tasmania's Stewart McSweyn as well. He is our new Craig Mottram - an Aussie who can run with the might of Africa.

FACE OF THE GAMES With Immortals Usain Bolt and Michael Phelps no longer competing, the international face of the Tokyo Olympics won't come from the track or the pool - it will be American gymnast Simone Biles. Her smile will light up the world.

NRL Bottom 8 9 Bulldogs 10 Sea Eagles 11 Sharks 12 Broncos 13 Dragons 14 Warriors 15 Wests Tigers 16 Cowboys

NRL Top 8 1 Storm 2 Rabbitohs 3 Raiders 4 Eels 5 Roosters 6 Knights 7 Panthers 8 Titans

BEST SUMMER READS Sit back, chill and enjoy some of the finest words in a fantastic line-up of sporting books.

Tough Love The inspirational story of three-time world champion boxer Lovemore Ndou. When Lovemore stopped fighting in the ring he began fighting for justice, and he is now a successful Sydney lawyer specialising in criminal law and family law.

Cameron Smith The greatest rugby league player of all-time holds nothing back in his life story that is going absolutely gangbusters on all the bookstores.

Mike Colman One of my favourite all-time sports journos. It's a fantastic read including great yarns on Richie Benaud, Darren Lockyer, Glen Boss, Eddie Jones, Wendell Sailor and Andrew Symonds.

Unforgiven - Ash GrayAsh is a sub-editor at the Daily Tele who can even turn Dean 'Bulldog' Ritchie's copy into English. His book is the untold story of the rebel West Indian players who toured apartheid South Africa 40 years ago and how it affected their lives. It has already won a squillion awards.

SHORT & SHARP ■ Boyd Cordner - story of the year ■ Wayne Bennett farewell dinner at Grappa ■ Rabs to retire ■ Joseph Suaalii Dally M rookie of the year ■ An NRL coach to be sacked by Round 12 ■ Buddy Franklin to get injured

FIGHT FEAST At least two Australian boxing world champions by the end of 2021. Tim Tszyu needs to move up a gear and challenge some of the bigger names and belt holders.

Bashing up a way-past-his-best Jeff Horn and then Kiwi Bowyn Morgan at Bankwest Stadium still leaves question marks.

There will be some other great opportunities for Aussie fighters. Andrew Moloney will surely get another crack at Joshua Franco after being robbed in Las Vegas.

His twin brother Jason was outclassed by Japan's unified bantamweight champion Naoya 'Monster' Inoue but will come back strongly.

Heavyweight Justis Huni is the most exciting of the lot. He won the Australian title in his first professional fight then demolished previously undefeated Arsene Fosso six weeks later. He has extraordinary hand speed for a big man. An Olympic gold medal and a world title fight are his goals. Jeff Fenech's classy super bantamweight Brock Jarvis is also ready to go to the next level.