

The election -- well, at least the voting -- is over. The coronavirus pandemic is not.

Voters were largely focused on the coronavirus during this cycle, with those concerned about rising case counts favoring Joseph R. Biden Jr., the Democratic candidate. Those worried about the economy and the disruptions that accompanied the state-by-state lockdowns put in place as a response to the virus went for President Trump. The president had tried to divert attention from the pandemic, even after he was hospitalized with the virus in early October. But the health crisis remained a defining issue -- more than four in 10 voters said it was the most important problem facing the country -- amid pervasive pessimism. Nearly two-thirds of voters, in polling by The Associated Press, said they believed that the country was heading in the wrong direction.

The virus is surging again in the Northeast. States like Maine, Rhode Island and Connecticut have all reported records for new daily cases in the past week. In Pennsylvania, where cases have climbed by 61 percent since Oct. 21, the state set a single-day record on Election Day, posting 2,868 new cases. New York's trend line is about where it was in mid-May, but it was declining then as the devastating first wave ebbed. Now it is moving in the opposite direction: The statewide caseload has jumped by 54 percent in two weeks.

In New Jersey, where cases have risen by 62 percent in that time, officials have warned that ''very, very preliminary'' modeling suggests that cases may not peak until early 2021. ''We're going to be vigilant from now through March,'' Judith M. Persichilli, the state health commissioner, said on Monday. And in contrast to the summer -- when the virus seemed to be striking younger people -- people between ages 35 and 55 are ''the ones that are mainly driving the big increases that we're seeing now,'' said Dr. Edward Lifshitz, the medical director of the state health department's communicable disease service.

But caseloads in all of those Northeastern states are well below those in hot spots in the Midwest and the West. On a seven-day average, North Dakota leads the nation with 151 cases per 100,000 residents, followed by South Dakota with 131.2 and Wisconsin with 82.9. The comparable figure for New Jersey is 18.5. For New York, it is 11.

Still, officials in New Jersey were so concerned about transmission of the virus in prisons that they made plans to release 2,258 inmates on Wednesday. More than 1,000 additional prisoners will be released in the coming months, reducing New Jersey's prison population by roughly 35 percent.

In Alaska, where cases have soared by 90 percent since Oct. 21, wardens are coping with outbreaks at two prisons -- one, a medium-security facility 30 miles from Wasilla, where 22 inmates and five staff members last week tested positive for the coronavirus, and the other, an overcrowded jail in Fairbanks, where 33 inmates tested positive in mid-October.

XXX

With a second wave engulfing Europe, Italy tightened restrictions by announcing a monthlong curfew. But officials pledged to avoid another nationwide lockdown, instead adopting an approach that largely failed to tamp down infections elsewhere in Europe. Restaurants, bars and nonessential businesses in ''high risk'' areas will be directed to shut down.

Restaurants in Italy have been under orders to close at 6 p.m. since last month, giving rise to ''tagliatelle migrants,'' as one newspaper called Italians who go to dinner in the Republic of San Marino, the tiny nation in the middle of Italy, about 90 minutes from Florence. Italian officials worry that Italians tempted by San Marino's relatively lax pandemic rules might take the virus home along with their doggie bags.

XXX

In the hunt for the source of the virus, it became clear this week that the World Health Organization had quietly negotiated terms that sidelined experts who went to Beijing in mid-February. But though the W.H.O. may not have found the origins of the virus, the virus did find the W.H.O. The agency's director-general, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, has been in quarantine this week after coming into contact with someone who tested positive. ''We have to keep going,'' he added, ''whether I'm at home or in the office.''

Dr. Tedros is not the only official to have had a recent brush with the virus. News outlets quoted the Algerian government as confirming that it was the coronavirus that sent President Abdelmadjid Tebboune of Algeria to a hospital in Germany last week. The government said Mr. Tebboune, who is 74 and a heavy smoker, was ''gradually improving.'' It was the first time that Algerian officials had explicitly mentioned Covid-19 in connection with his hospitalization, although the president had gone into ''voluntary preventive confinement'' on Oct. 24 after several top officials were found to have been infected.

''Is Denmark's parliament at the center of a coronavirus outbreak?'' the Danish website The Local asked after a session with Prime Minister Mette Frederiksen had to be postponed. The reason for the delay: She and two-thirds of the cabinet had gone into quarantine because the justice minister, Nick Haekkerup, had attended meetings with them before he announced on Facebook that he had the virus. Five other cabinet ministers were already in quarantine after coming in contact with a member of parliament who later tested positive.

The diagnosis and quarantine did not stop Ms. Frederiksen from taking part in a virtual news conference to announce that the Danish government would slaughter millions of infected mink. The concern is that the mutation of the coronavirus that struck them could interfere with the effectiveness of vaccines. ''A mutated virus risks being spread to other countries,'' she said.

XXX

A footnote about the election: A candidate who died of Covid-19 was elected to the state legislature in North Dakota. The candidate, David Andahl -- a 55-year-old cattle rancher who ran as a Republican and defeated a longtime incumbent in the primary in June -- received 35.5 percent of the vote even though he died last month after the ballots were printed. His mother, Pat Andahl, told The Bismarck Tribune that he had been looking forward to becoming a lawmaker. ''He wanted to make things better for farmers and the coal industry,'' she said.Coronavirus Update wraps up the day's developments with information from across the virus report.





