

It has been almost a year since the World Health Organization assigned a name to the disease caused by a coronavirus that had not yet been declared a pandemic -- Covid-19. On Tuesday, W.H.O. scientists said it was ''extremely unlikely'' that the virus came from a laboratory accident in Wuhan, the city in central China where the first cases of Covid-19 were discovered.

The W.H.O. scientists have been on a closely monitored field trip to Wuhan for the past 12 days, a first step in the effort to pin down the origins of a virus that has infected more than 106 million people and killed more than 2.3 million. Alongside Chinese scientists, researchers presented their preliminary findings at a three-hour news conference, where they said the virus had been circulating in Wuhan for several weeks before it reached a market where some of the earliest virus clusters were first reported.

For the W.H.O., the visit provided an opportunity to dispel criticism that it has been too deferential to China. Even so, the W.H.O. experts praised Chinese officials at the news conference and endorsed elements of the Chinese narrative about the pandemic. The W.H.O. team said it was possible the virus might have spread from international shipments of frozen food, a claim that scientists outside China have disputed.

In Washington on Tuesday, the focus remained on increasing the supply of vaccines. Jeffrey D. Zients, the Biden administration's coronavirus response coordinator, said that beginning next week vaccine allocations to states would be increased to 11 million doses per week -- two million more doses per week than were being distributed when the administration took office last month. Dr. Marcella Nunez-Smith, the chairwoman of the administration's Covid-19 equity task force, said the government was preparing to send an additional one million doses to 250 community health centers that focus on underserved communities.

But vaccine frustration persists. In many places, the only appointments that are available are weeks away, and clunky websites have been an impediment to smooth scheduling. ''There has to be a better way,'' Huge Ma, a 31-year-old software engineer for Airbnb, recalled thinking while trying to book an appointment for his mother.

So he built a better website -- in less than two weeks, for less than $50. On his site, TurboVax, it is easier to find vaccine appointments than on the official New York City and New York State systems.

TurboVax isn't the only site to spring up. MAcovidvaccines.com scrapes data from other websites every five minutes to show what vaccine centers are offering appointments in Massachusetts. It was started by Olivia Adams, a software developer on maternity leave, after her mother-in-law had trouble booking an appointment for a vaccine. VaccinateCA, a volunteer-run vaccine finder site in California, inspired volunteers in New York to create NYC Vaccine List, which compiles appointments from more than 50 vaccination sites.

Iowa, which ranks 47th in the nation in doses administered per capita, posted a notice on Monday that it was bringing in a tech giant to set up an online scheduling system -- Microsoft. Kim Reynolds said last week that the state did not open the appointment scheduling process earlier because she did not want people to ''get their hopes up'' until vaccines were widely available.

XXX

These would seem to be boom times for mask makers. As soon as he took office, President Biden asked Americans to wear masks for the first 100 days of his presidency. He also mandated their use on public transportation and on federal property.

But some small companies that make N95 masks, which filter out 95 percent of airborne particles containing the virus, are struggling. They have run up against the longstanding purchasing habits of medical supply distributors and hospital systems -- as well as Amazon, Facebook and Google, which had banned the sale or advertising of N95 masks on their platforms. (At the time, the three tech giants wanted to prevent profiteers from siphoning off gear needed by frontline medical workers.) And American-made masks are often more expensive than similar products from China.

DemeTech, a company based in Miami that specialized in sutures and surgical mesh before the pandemic, invested in mask-making machines in the spring. Now it has 30 million N95 masks in its warehouse. ''It's insane that we can't get these masks to the people who desperately need them,'' said Luis Arguello Jr., the company's vice president.

But disposable masks present a problem -- they're bad for the environment. In a study published last week, Australian researchers proposed a possible solution: recycling used face masks to construct roads.

The paper, published in the journal Science of the Total Environment, looked at how face masks could be combined with other recycled construction materials to reduce waste from the pandemic and reliance on materials like plastic, which is often used as a filler in roads. The researchers found that roads made with shredded face masks and other recyclables were likely to be stronger than those made with traditional materials.

XXX

For musicians, the pandemic has redefined what a performance is, and many have turned to the internet to connect with fans. Judy Collins recently went to a familiar setting, Town Hall in Manhattan, to record a performance that will be streamed online on Friday. It was familiar because it was the scene of her New York debut, in March 1964, when she was 23, and she sang some of the songs that she performed then, including ''The Lonesome Death of Hattie Carroll.'' But it was different this time. ''Audience-free,'' she said. ''Totally empty and basically dark, except for the lighting on the stage.''

It took her back to when she was a teenager. ''My father had a radio show for 30 years'' in Denver, she said. ''I used to go to the studio and be on that show, and there's no live audience out there. Nowadays you can Zoom, but basically it's still radio -- there's nobody there but me'' and the musicians accompanying her. ''Radio was good training,'' she said. ''My father always said: 'Don't worry about size of your audience. It could be two people, and one of them could be the queen of England.'''Coronavirus Update wraps up the day's developments with information from across the virus report.





