

A third coronavirus vaccine shows promising results, its developers said on Monday, but the day when people can roll up their sleeves and get vaccinated is still in the future. The timetable for approval is not accelerating. But the spread of the virus is.

The still-escalating national crisis is a coast-to-coast catastrophe: The major metropolitan areas where new cases are at or near record levels extend from Pittsburgh and Baltimore to Albuquerque and San Diego. Seventeen states added more cases in the seven-day period that ended on Sunday than in any other week during the pandemic. Nine states are reporting more than twice as many new cases as they did two weeks ago. None of them are in the Upper Midwest, where states like North Dakota and Wisconsin propelled the outbreaks after Labor Day.

Even New York, an early epicenter of the pandemic, is on a grim track right now, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said as he announced new restrictions in parts of the state where infections had recently increased, including a zone in Upper Manhattan. He said that the infection rate in New York was one of the lowest in the nation and was a fraction of the three states with the highest rates: Wyoming, South Dakota and Iowa. But the number of people hospitalized from the virus in New York State has more than doubled in the past three weeks, to just over 2,700; if that trend continued, the governor warned, 6,000 people could be hospitalized three weeks from now.

Mr. Cuomo and other officials repeated warnings about holiday travel: Don't go to Grandma's house. Don't gather together for Thanksgiving. ''Let me be very clear: A Thanksgiving gathering this year may very well lead to a funeral,'' said Gov. Michelle Lujan Grisham of New Mexico, whose state is home to five of the 10 metropolitan areas in the country where new case reports are rising the fastest. ''The virus is at large,'' Ms. Grisham added.

The news about the vaccine results came from the drugmaker AstraZeneca, which developed a drug with Oxford University. The company said early data from the late-stage clinical trials in Britain and Brazil indicated that the vaccine was ''highly effective.'' Two other companies, Pfizer and Moderna, both said that their vaccines were about 95 percent effective in late-stage trials. AstraZeneca's trials involved giving patients two different doses. One was 90 percent effective in preventing Covid-19. The other was 62 percent effective. The more effective results came with a smaller first dose.

But if the announcement from AstraZeneca was another encouraging sign in the race to bring the virus under control, the long lines at testing centers in many places were not. Neither are staff shortages at many hot-spot hospitals where workers are getting sick or burning out from stress. There do not appear to be shortages of ventilators. A flurry of production in the spring and summer turned out more than 200,000 of the machines, three-fourths of which went into the Strategic National Stockpile, ending the shortage that defined the first wave of the pandemic. But just as there are not enough nurses this time around, there are not enough critical care specialists to run the machines.

Exactly how the virus is spreading in the United States remains unclear. Pinpointing the origins of outbreaks has become more difficult now that the virus is so widespread and people can be exposed in so many ways. But household get-togethers apparently do not account for the recent rise in new cases, and some infectious disease specialists say such gatherings have become convenient targets for political leaders. Data, where available, still point to long-term care facilities, food processing plants, prisons, health care facilities, and restaurants and bars as the leading sources for transmission of the virus.

XXX

It is a monetary incentive that no one should want: Hong Kong is paying people $650 if they test positive for the coronavirus. Sophia Chan, Hong Kong's health secretary, said the policy was aimed at people who had avoided getting tested because they could not afford to miss work if they were found to be infected. Critics said that the policy could motivate people to infect themselves, a possibility that officials discounted.

In Shanghai, poorly organized testing of airport workers degenerated into chaos. China has become adept at crushing coronavirus flare-ups by ordering people to line up for tests that can pinpoint carriers. Officials ordered immediate tests for cargo handlers and other airport workers after a cluster was identified over the weekend, with three airport workers and two of their spouses infected.

The testing was to take place in a converted parking garage. Video footage that circulated on Chinese social media showed guards in protective suits struggling to hold back an angry crowd and prompted criticism that the testers were increasing the risks of infection. ''Even if the outbreak is urgent, there aren't even the most basic safety and distancing measures,'' said one comment widely shared on Weibo, a popular social media platform in China.

The video was soon removed from Weibo and WeChat, another widely used social media service, apparently because censors intervened. The Shanghai police issued pictures of airport workers waiting calmly to be tested in the garage -- apparently after officials had restored control.

XXX

In the spring, Sweden was an outlier, admired or reviled for its laissez-faire approach to restrictions, which it largely ignored. Many epidemiologists challenged the strategy, and now Sweden, like the rest of Europe, has been coping with a surge. Sweden's seven-day average has climbed past 4,400 new cases a day. Its death rate from the virus is one of the highest in the world.

The country began to clamp down last week. The Swedish king, Carl XVI Gustaf, issued a warning on Instagram -- ''Hold on tight'' -- and the government banned public gatherings of more than eight people. But Prime Minister Stefan Löfven ruled out a lockdown. On Sunday, he made an unusual nationwide address, pleading for compliance with Sweden's minimal guidelines. ''If you live alone, choose one or, at most, two friends to socialize with but keep a distance,'' he said. ''And to you who are an employer: If you can, make it possible for employees to work from home.''Coronavirus Update wraps up the day's developments with information from across the virus report.





