Here’s what you need to know.

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)

Good morning.

We’re covering the U.S.-China feud over the pandemic, promising results from a vaccine trial and the German far right’s return to the streets.

U.S.-China feud on display at W.H.O. meeting

China’s leader, Xi Jinping, on Monday promised $2 billion for the World Health Organization’s fight against the pandemic, but he brushed aside calls for an independent investigation into the origins of the coronavirus.

The Trump administration, which has halted U.S. funding to the global health agency and threatened to make that permanent, dismissed China’s pledge as an attempt to forestall scrutiny over its handling of the outbreak. Addressing an online W.H.O. forum, Mr. Xi said China had “turned the tide on the virus and protected lives.”

Momentum has been building for a W.H.O. inquiry into the origins and spread of the coronavirus. Mr. Xi said that China supported a review of the global response to the outbreak, but only after the pandemic was controlled.

U.S. reaction: A senior Trump administration official called China’s promise of aid “a token to distract from calls from a growing number of nations demanding accountability.”

China’s economy: Our reporters looked at China’s two-decade global lending spree to expand its influence. Now, as the world economy reels, countries are telling Beijing they can’t pay the money back.

Here are the latest updates and            maps of the pandemic.

The Times is providing free access to much of our coronavirus coverage, and our            Coronavirus Briefing newsletter — like all of our newsletters — is free. Please consider            supporting our journalism with a subscription.

Germany backs E.U. debt as its far right stirs

The leaders of Germany and Francejoined forces Monday to propose borrowing 500 billion euros, or $545 billion, for a recovery fund to help E.U. countries hit hardest by the pandemic.

The entire bloc would be responsible for the fund’s repayment, which would primarily benefit the poorer south — an economic approach Germany has resisted for decades.

What it means: If approved, the plan would signal a more unified Europe ahead. In countries like Italy, where many feel abandoned by their neighbors, anti-European and populist sentiment has spiked.

Risks for Germany: It might fortify the far-right Alternative for Germany party, which was built on euroskepticism and is trying to capitalize on coronavirus protests as the country reopens.

Opinion: One writer explores why, for Germany, the way out of a lockdown is much harder than the way in.

In other news:

•Rome’s center was buzzing again on Monday after 10 weeks of lockdown. While some Italian galleries are reopening, the Venice Biennale said it would            postpone two of its signature exhibitions.•Iran is facing a surge in cases after reopening without having met recommended benchmarks in testing and contact tracing.•Facing a seasonal shortage of migrant laborers, Germany has allowed farmers to fly in Eastern European workers. But that has raised concerns about importing new infections.•One month after the end of the lockdown in Wuhan, China, residents of the city where the virus emerged are feeling trauma, grief and gratitude.

Rome’s center was buzzing again on Monday after 10 weeks of lockdown. While some Italian galleries are reopening, the Venice Biennale said it would            postpone two of its signature exhibitions.

Iran is facing a surge in cases after reopening without having met recommended benchmarks in testing and contact tracing.

Facing a seasonal shortage of migrant laborers, Germany has allowed farmers to fly in Eastern European workers. But that has raised concerns about importing new infections.

One month after the end of the lockdown in Wuhan, China, residents of the city where the virus emerged are feeling trauma, grief and gratitude.

Promising early results from small vaccine trial

The first coronavirus vaccine tested on people was able tosafely stimulate an immune response against the coronavirus infection, its manufacturer, Moderna, said on Monday.

The vaccine, given to eight volunteers who each received two doses, is now on an accelerated timetable to be tested on hundreds more. If successful, doses could be available for the public by the end of this year or early 2021, the company said.

Details: Moderna’s technology, which uses genetic material from the virus called mRNA, is relatively new and has not yet produced an approved vaccine. One potential strength: Its genetic framework can be quickly adapted for each new viral threat.

Context: Dozens of companies around the world are working on vaccines. Experts say the world will need more than one, because demand will outstrip the production capacity of any single manufacturer.

Official remarks: President Trump said he had been taking hydroxychloroquine, an antimalarial drug that experts have warned could cause dangerous heart rhythm abnormalities in coronavirus patients, as a preventive measure. He said he had no symptoms of Covid-19.

If you have some time, this is worth it

Finding joy in unexpected places

These are not, on the surface, joyful times. Not in the slightest. Which is why you deserve some relief. Our Styles desk asked 14 writers what was bringing them joy right now; their answers ranged from the mundane, like deleting mediocre photos, to big-picture joys like caring for others.

The joy of getting lost was on the writer Alex Williams’s mind. That means walks with no GPS and no destination in mind: “It’s you versus the maze that is life. It’s up to you to find your way out.”

Here’s what else is happening

Al Qaeda: U.S. investigators linked Al Qaeda to last year’s deadly shooting at a military base in Pensacola, Fla. They said the gunman, a Saudi cadet training there, communicated with a Qaeda operative who had encouraged the attacks.

Hong Kong brawl: A second scuffle broke out Monday between lawmakers in Hong Kong, as they debated the leadership of a committee scheduled to consider legislation that some fear would tighten China’s control.

Snapshot: Above, the stands at a spectator-free FC Seoul game in the South Korean capital on Sunday. Yes, those are sex dolls. The team, which had been trying to maintain a festive atmosphere with what it thought were ordinary mannequins, apologized.

European football: German soccer is also being played in empty arenas, forcing a nation of fans to cheer from afar. Our soccer correspondent reflects on the new reality.

Fox fun: Toronto had been abiding by its strict coronavirus lockdown. But when a family of adorable foxes set up a den at the beach, all bets were off.

What we’re reading: This Brain Pickings essay about “the extraordinary and enduring love between Emily Dickinson and Susan Gilbert, who ended up marrying her brother, Austin Dickinson.” Steven Erlanger, our chief diplomatic correspondent in Europe, says it “is beautifully told and helps the lockdown.”

Now, a break from the news

Cook: This buttery caper sauce will lift asparagus or any other vegetable. Or try it with scrambled eggs, or even on its own as a side dish.

Watch: A second viewing of a play online can bring fresh revelations. And here’s            a look back at films to stream from the director Lynn Shelton, who died last week.

Do: Give a different kind of graduation gift for the class of 2020 as they move into an off-kilter world. And look a little closer at macramé, rattan, bar carts and other            interior décor trends.

Listen: A stellar acoustic Aventura concert, archived on YouTube, is on our critics’            latest list of music recommendations, as are John Legend and Dijon.

Some lockdowns are easing, but if you’re staying safe at home, we have a lot more ideas about what to read, cook, do and watch.

And now for the Back Story on …

The honorific ‘Mrs.’

What does marriage mean for a woman’s identity? What does it mean for her name? Those questions are at the center of The Mrs. Files, a new project from The Times.

For the newsletter In Her Words, our writer discussed these questions with three poets: Sarah Kay, Denice Frohman and Helen Mort. Here’s an excerpt from the conversation. (           Sign up for In Her Words here.)

The Mrs. Files looks at what it means, and what it has meant, for a woman to be identified by her partner’s last name — regardless of her accomplishments. Tell me what your name has meant to your career.

Sarah: I take names very seriously. When I meet someone, it’s always important to me that I check with them about what they would like to be called. So much of who we are is what we get called by in the world, so defining what we would like to be called is this moment of potential agency. That agency is taken away when the world calls us something we don’t want to be called.

Denice: Growing up, I lived most of my adolescence solely with my mother, who’s Puerto Rican. My father is Jewish. A lot of children of multicultural families have hyphenated names but I don’t, and it’s not lost on me that I have my father’s last name solely because of a patriarchal idea. So much about writing is pointing at the world and pointing at yourself and finding language for what someone else has named.

When you were a child, did you dream of a traditional wedding?

Denice: I was very invested in a traditional wedding. My parents split up when I was very young. So I’d never seen a happy marriage and, with no model or example, I had to create one, so I pulled from pop culture. As I got older and stepped into my sexuality, I had to unpack that. I was trying to conform to an expectation instead of living a life that was in my own handwriting.

Helen: I started thinking recently about who weddings are for. I always assumed that if I got married it would just be for me and for my partner. But then you start thinking about relatives and it becomes a difficult negotiation between the public and the private.

That’s it for this briefing. I enjoyed this essay by Teju Cole. See you next time.

— Isabella

Thank youTo Melissa Clark for the recipe, and to Theodore Kim and Jahaan Singh for the rest of the break from the news. You can reach the team at briefing@nytimes.com.

P.S. We’re listening to “The Daily.” Our latest episode is on the U.S. Congress’s plans to allocate money to economic relief.  Here’s today’s            Mini Crossword puzzle, and a clue: Extended comedic riff (three letters).            You can find all our puzzles here. A Style desk editor wrote in Times Insider about why a            project months in the making about joy was essential right now.

PHOTO:  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Brian Snyder/Reuters FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)