The Trump administration is putting pressure on school districts to resume in-person learning by the fall.

This is the Coronavirus Briefing, an informed guide to the global outbreak. Sign up here to get the briefing by email.

•The U.S.has surpassed three million cases of the coronavirus, adding more than 650,000 in the last two weeks alone.•Houston officials ordered the cancellation of the Texas Republican Party’s convention, scheduled for next week, as the city fights one of the worst outbreaks in the U.S.•A Dutch hospital pressed charges against a visitor accused of exposing medical workers to the virus.•Get the latest updates here, plus maps and a tracker for U.S. metro areas.

The U.S.has surpassed three million cases of the coronavirus, adding more than 650,000 in the last two weeks alone.

Houston officials ordered the cancellation of the Texas Republican Party’s convention, scheduled for next week, as the city fights one of the worst outbreaks in the U.S.

A Dutch hospital pressed charges against a visitor accused of exposing medical workers to the virus.

Get the latest updates here, plus maps and a tracker for U.S. metro areas.

How can schools reopen safely?

In an ideal world, schools would reopen in the fall.

There’s near universal support for the idea, from the American Academy of Pediatrics, parents, educators and politicians. But that support comes with an important condition: It must be done safely.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has issued guidelines for reopening schools, which include recommendations like screening students and employees when they arrive and preparing to protect those at higher risk. President Trump assailed those guidelines today as “very tough and expensive,” and hours later Vice President Mike Pence announced that the C.D.C. would issue new recommendations next week.

While Americans wait for the revised guidance, New York City, home to the nation’s largest school system, may offer a model for moving forward.

Under Mayor Bill de Blasio’s plan, released today, public schools will not fully reopen in the fall. Instead, schools will open only one to three days a week and will use a mix of online and in-person learning. The goal is to limit the number of people in a classroom to about a dozen.

Perhaps the biggest hurdle in bringing children back to school is funding. It’s estimated that schools would need $200 billion to safely welcome back students, but Congress has offered just $13.5 billion so far.

Mr. Trump today threatened to cut off federal aid to schools that refuse to fully reopen in the fall. But if he wants children back in class, argues David Plotz of Business Insider, he could help by requesting billions in emergency funds that could, for example, add extra classroom space to promote social distancing or fund a national teaching corps of recent college graduates similar to Teach for America.

Even if schools reopen in the fall, parents would still need to feel safe before they send their children to class. The preconditions, then, are the same as those for restarting the economy: a sense of security that comes through testing, contact tracing and a downward trajectory of cases.

Chaos in higher education

American colleges and universities are also in a state of uncertainty, as officials race to finalize fall plans, train teachers on remote learning and figure out how best to limit exposure to the virus on campus.

Many elite universities like Harvard and Princeton have announced that courses will take place entirely or mostly online, with only some students returning to campus. (President Trump calledHarvard’s decision “ridiculous” and “the easy way out.”) Most community colleges are also going digital.

Many public universities and small private colleges, though, have decided to bring all their students back. Unlike the elite schools, which can attract students no matter what, most of these colleges may face deep financial trouble if students delay enrollment or demand discounts for remote learning.

Across the country, thousands of faculty members have told administrators they are unwilling to teach in person because of safety concerns. After intense criticism, the University System of Georgia reversed a policy on masks, requiring them in classrooms instead of merely “encouraging” them.

A decision this week by the Immigration and Customs Enforcement agency to revoke the visas of foreign students enrolled only in online courses has thrown another wrench into the system. Harvard and M.I.T.sued the Trump administration today to block the policy, which was widely seen as a way to pressure colleges into reopening and which could force many students to leave the U.S.

Resurgences

•Tennesseereported more than 2,100 new cases and 21 deaths today, records in both categories. The state has shown that early testing is no match for the virus once it overwhelms the capacity to trace infected people’s contacts and forces them to quarantine.•Hong Kong has entered what one health official described as “a third wave” of infections. It reported 38 new cases yesterday and today, after months of no new daily infections.•In Serbia, protesters in the capital stormed the Parliament building after stricter measures, including a weekend curfew, were imposed because of rising infections, the BBC reports.•The governor of New Jerseyis requiring face coverings outdoors when social distancing is not possible.

Tennesseereported more than 2,100 new cases and 21 deaths today, records in both categories. The state has shown that early testing is no match for the virus once it overwhelms the capacity to trace infected people’s contacts and forces them to quarantine.

Hong Kong has entered what one health official described as “a third wave” of infections. It reported 38 new cases yesterday and today, after months of no new daily infections.

In Serbia, protesters in the capital stormed the Parliament building after stricter measures, including a weekend curfew, were imposed because of rising infections, the BBC reports.

The governor of New Jerseyis requiring face coverings outdoors when social distancing is not possible.

Here’s a roundup of restrictions in all 50 states.

What else we’re following

•In a new study, British neurologists warned that doctors may be missing signs of serious brain disorders in Covid-19 patients with mild symptoms, The Guardian reports.•Puerto Rico has taken one of the hardest economic hits in the U.S., as the pandemic plunges the island into its fifth dire emergency in three years.•To revive tourism, some countries are trying to lure visitors with visa waivers, free entry to attractions and even medical coverage for the virus.•Three outbreaks in Asia — which spread in an office, a restaurant and a bus — offer lessons on how the virus spreads in enclosed spaces, El País reports.•As the World Health Organization sends an advance team to China to begin to look into the origins of the pandemic, an infectious disease specialist has eight questions he’d like them to ask.•On today’s episode of The Daily, Robert Gebeloff, a reporter specializing in data analysis, tells how The Times got hold of information on hundreds of thousands of coronavirus cases.•In areas where the virus is declining, forming “social pods” can help families find joy and regain some sense of normalcy, a Medium columnist writes.•Does your hand sanitizer stink? Our colleagues at the Wirecutter explored why killing germs suddenly smells so awful.

In a new study, British neurologists warned that doctors may be missing signs of serious brain disorders in Covid-19 patients with mild symptoms, The Guardian reports.

Puerto Rico has taken one of the hardest economic hits in the U.S., as the pandemic plunges the island into its fifth dire emergency in three years.

To revive tourism, some countries are trying to lure visitors with visa waivers, free entry to attractions and even medical coverage for the virus.

Three outbreaks in Asia — which spread in an office, a restaurant and a bus — offer lessons on how the virus spreads in enclosed spaces, El País reports.

As the World Health Organization sends an advance team to China to begin to look into the origins of the pandemic, an infectious disease specialist has eight questions he’d like them to ask.

On today’s episode of The Daily, Robert Gebeloff, a reporter specializing in data analysis, tells how The Times got hold of information on hundreds of thousands of coronavirus cases.

In areas where the virus is declining, forming “social pods” can help families find joy and regain some sense of normalcy, a Medium columnist writes.

Does your hand sanitizer stink? Our colleagues at the Wirecutter explored why killing germs suddenly smells so awful.

What you’re doing

My 20-something daughters who have been staying with me since March conduct video exercise classes for two older relatives in Michigan. This has made for many smiles, laughs and memorable moments that would not have otherwise occurred.

— Caroline Seibert Goray, Raleigh, N.C.

Let us know how you’re dealing with the outbreak. Send us a response here, and we may feature it in an upcoming newsletter.

Sign up here to get the briefing by email.

PHOTO:  (PHOTOGRAPH BY  FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)