Amy Schecter makes her New York Times Crossword debut, ably abetted by Christina Iverson.

TUESDAY PUZZLE — There have been all sorts of ideas — put forth by both men and women — about whether women are more or less likely to help other women along in their careers. Fortunately, I am happy to report that, from what I have witnessed among female constructors, the sort of bias against bringing along less experienced women is not apparent.

Perhaps it is because of the historical gender imbalance in crossword bylines, but the constructors who identify as women that I know mostly adhere to Madeleine Albright’s famous quote that “there is a special place in hell for women who don’t help other women.” We’ve seen venues such as The Inkubator and Women of Letters save a place for women who want to construct puzzles, and some of them have gone on to contribute to a variety of other puzzle operations. In a perfect world, we would all understand that we stand on the shoulders of those who came before us.

That’s why I was so happy to see today’s byline. Amy Schecter makes her New York Times Crossword debut in a collaboration with Christina Iverson, who made her own New York Times debut not that long ago. Ms. Iverson, in turn, was mentored by and had collaborated with the constructors Ross Trudeau and Jeff Chen.

Ms. Iverson could have just stopped there and continued to make her own puzzles, but that’s not what this community is about. Regardless of gender, puzzle makers are some of the most generous people I know, particularly with their time and knowledge. The puzzle world has picked up a lot of speed in terms of raising others up lately, and I am very glad to see it.

So welcome, Ms. Schecter. No pressure, but I’m looking forward to seeing who you bring along.

Tricky Clues

13A. The “Group of docs” is shortened to indicate an initialism or abbreviation, and in this puzzle, that group of docs is the American Medical Association, or A.M.A.

26A. Sadly, the actress Dawn Wells died of complications related to Covid-19 on Dec. 30. It’s a shame she wasn’t able to see herself in the theme clue/entry pairing “Actress Wells has just entered the scene” for DAWNS ON.

64A. I was today years old when I learned that the I.R.S. had an Inspector General. The only other time I’ve heard of that position was in the Danny Kaye movie:

[Video:  Watch on YouTube.]

67A. This is the crossword equivalent of a Dad joke: Corny and expected, but it still makes you smile and feel as if all is right with the world. The “Head of England?” is a LOO, because “head” can be slang for toilet. The British slang for toilet is LOO.

4D. I realize that it is the condo board’s right to set any restrictions they want, but NO DOGS make me sad. Dogs make everything better.

53D. A moment of silence, please, for my youth — well misspent at C.B.G.B., the only N.Y.C. club where I almost had to leave my shoes behind because they were stuck to the floor.

Today’s Theme

Ms. Schecter and Ms. Iverson offer us common phrases that have been reimagined as puns on the first names of people of note.

For example, at 16A, the phrase PATS DOWN — as in to frisk someone — has been turned into a mental health check on the singer Pat Benatar, with the clue “Singer Benatar feels blue.” Similarly, at 37A, the actor Jack Nicholson takes his turn at bat with the entry JACKS UP. The possessives are ignored.

I thought that there was another layer to this theme, because most of the entries were at least somewhat directional: DOWN, OVER, ON, UP, IN and OFF, until I got to 53A’s CHUCKS IT. CHUCKS OUT would have tucked that entry neatly into that theme layer, but it’s one letter too long.

Even so, it’s a cute theme and the surrounding fill was very nice. I especially liked MATCH WITS, GOES DEEP, ALSO RAN, JETSKIED, TEACH ME and BIG HIT.

Constructor Notes

Amy: I’m so tickled to be making my New York Times Crossword debut!

By way of an intro: I’m a retired Broadway casting director living in Brewster, N.Y. My mom and I always solved the Sunday puzzle together and I started doing the weekly during a two-week jury duty stint. It took me the entirety of the two weeks to finish a Monday puzzle, but since I was a jury duty prisoner I surely had the time.

I got interested in construction only a few years ago through the J.A.S.A. constructing class. I attribute the origin of my love for words and wordplay to a childhood of watching Rocky and Bullwinkle, Fractured Fairy Tales, and Mr. Peabody and Sherman cartoons.

Thanks, Christina, for your patience with this novice.

Christina: Amy and I connected through the FacebookCrossword Puzzle Collaboration Directory. She had commented on the group that she was full of ideas but didn’t really enjoy grid work. I love working on grid design and fill, but at the time, I was really struggling with fresh ideas. I was pregnant with baby No. 2, so I was totally exhausted and having pretty major pregnancy brain. I also liked the idea of working with an unpublished constructor, and sharing what I’d learned from my mentors when I started out the year before. I reached out to see if she’d be up for a collaboration, and she emailed me a whole bunch of fun ideas. We ended up making three puzzles together, including one in The Inkubator last year.

The theme set that Amy sent originally included other, longer phrases, like BOBS FOR APPLES as “Mr. Dylan loves Granny Smiths,” which I thought was pretty funny, but we decided to make the theme more consistent by sticking to two-word phrases. It was a fun challenge to make this grid, with a lot of short theme entries rather than fewer long entries.

The Tipping Point

Almost finished solving but need a bit more help? We’ve got you covered.

Warning: There be spoilers ahead, but subscribers can take a peek at the answer key.

Trying to get back to the puzzle page? Right here.

Your thoughts?

PHOTO: People visited the ice sculptures and carvings of the 2014 Harbin International Ice and Snow Festival in northeast China’s Heilongjiang province. (PHOTOGRAPH BY STR/AFP, via Getty Images FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)