In this lesson, students will research and learn about how historical pandemics ended medically and socially.

Find all our Lessons of the Day here.

Lesson Overview

Featured Article: “How Pandemics End” by Gina Kolata

Have you asked yourself, “When will this pandemic end?” Or do you already see an end in sight? As some states and countries are easing stay-at-home orders, historians look to the past to anticipate what is yet to come, and some say that any ending will be “messy.”

In this lesson, you will learn about how three historical pandemics ended. Then you will choose one pandemic to research further and draw your own conclusions about its medical and social ending.

Warm Up

Choose one of the two paintings from the article, “What Can We Learn From the Art of Pandemics Past?,” and then answer the questions below.

•What do you notice about the painting? What was your eye drawn to first?•What do you wonder about the painting? What can you infer about the pandemic through the painting?•Is there a story or a narrative that you imagine is connected to the painting?

What do you notice about the painting? What was your eye drawn to first?

What do you wonder about the painting? What can you infer about the pandemic through the painting?

Is there a story or a narrative that you imagine is connected to the painting?

Questions for Writing and Discussion

Read or listen to the article, then answer the following questions:

1. What are the two ways that most pandemics end? Why did Dora Vargha, a historian at the University of Exeter, say that pandemic endings can be very “messy”?

2. What did Dr. Susan Murray, of the Royal College of Surgeons in Dublin, notice about an epidemic of fear? What role have you seen fear play in the coronavirus pandemic?

3. What are some of theories behind how the bubonic plague died down? How was the bubonic plague’s decline different from that of smallpox?

4. What was the social ending of the 1918 flu? How did the flu of 1918 evolve and fade medically?

5. What are some of the predictions that historians and doctors have made about how Covid-19 will end medically and socially? Based on what you learned in the article, what do you think might happen?

Going Further

Which historical pandemic would you like to know more about? You can choose one mentioned in the article — the bubonic plague, smallpox or the 1918 flu — or research another pandemic or epidemic, such as AIDS or            polio.

Use these three questions to guide your research:

•What are the origins of the disease? When did it first appear?•What are the symptoms of the disease? How is it transmitted?•Has the disease “ended” yet? If yes, how did it fade or end medically and socially?

What are the origins of the disease? When did it first appear?

What are the symptoms of the disease? How is it transmitted?

Has the disease “ended” yet? If yes, how did it fade or end medically and socially?

Here are some sites you can use to start your research:

•Science News for Students has articles about all of the above-mentioned diseases. For example, you can enter keywords into the search engine to find sources like this            H.I.V./AIDS explainer or this            vaccine explainer.•The National Geographic Resource Library has an interactive map you can use to            track the spread of the Black Plague and a collection, “           Infectious Agents,” that has infographics, articles and interactive features all related to different infections.•If you are researching a pandemic that happened in the last 150 years and want to see how it was talked about at the time, you can use your New York Times account to access            TimesMachine. The TimesMachine search engine allows you to read original Times articles from 1851 to 2002.

Science News for Students has articles about all of the above-mentioned diseases. For example, you can enter keywords into the search engine to find sources like this            H.I.V./AIDS explainer or this            vaccine explainer.

The National Geographic Resource Library has an interactive map you can use to            track the spread of the Black Plague and a collection, “           Infectious Agents,” that has infographics, articles and interactive features all related to different infections.

If you are researching a pandemic that happened in the last 150 years and want to see how it was talked about at the time, you can use your New York Times account to access            TimesMachine. The TimesMachine search engine allows you to read original Times articles from 1851 to 2002.

PHOTO: A Sicilian fresco from 1445. In the previous century, the Black Death killed at least a third of Europe’s population. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Werner Forman/Universal Images Group/Getty Images FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)