Here’s what you need to know at the end of the day.

(Want to get this newsletter in your inbox? Here’s the sign-up.)

Good evening. Here’s the latest.

1. The trial of the former police officer accused of murdering George Floyd began in Minneapolis.

Opening statements from lawyers suggested that the cause of death would be crucial. Prosecutors began making the case that Mr. Floyd died of asphyxia, while the defense lawyer said that Mr. Floyd had numerous medical issues and that his death was caused by multiple factors, including “the adrenaline flowing through his body.”

A bystander video from the May 2020 episode showed the accused, Derek Chauvin, kneeling on Mr. Floyd’s neck for more than nine minutes. The death — of a Black man being subdued by a white officer — set off nationwide protests against police brutality and racism. Above, a protester today outside the Hennepin County Government Center.

The prosecution called three witnesses today, including the 911 operator who watched the altercation on a surveillance camera.

The trial, which continues on Tuesday, can be watched on nytimes.com via a livestream from Court TV, which is operating the only live feed from inside the courtroom.

2. As vice president, Joe Biden oversaw a “green jobs” package that produced notable failures.

This time will be different, Democrats say. Energy Secretary Jennifer Granholm said the clean energy loan program that is part of President Biden’s infrastructure plan would be “retooled” and “invigorated” for its second round. Above, an electric-car charging station in California.

Mr. Biden will lay out an array of proposals for $3 trillion in increased spending this week, including details of his infrastructure plan and a first look at his budget plans for the year.

Today, the administration announced it would designate an area of the Atlantic Ocean between Long Island and New Jersey as a priority offshore zone for wind turbines. Officials also announced $3 billion in loan guarantees for offshore wind projects.

3. The Moderna and Pfizer-BioNTech Covid-19 vaccines are highly effective in real-world conditions, the U.S. reported.

Consistent with clinical trials, a two-dose regimen prevented 90 percent of infections by two weeks after the second shot, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention study said. One dose prevented 80 percent of infections in two weeks.

Eligibility for the vaccines continues to expand. New York State will begin vaccinating people 30 and older on Tuesday and make all residents 16 and over eligible on April 6.

Six states — Kansas, Louisiana, North Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma and Texas — expanded eligibility to all adults today. Minnesota follows on Tuesday, and Indiana and South Carolina on Wednesday. Above, vaccines being readied in Houston.

But Hispanic people across the U.S. continue to be especially underrepresented among those vaccinated, according to a Times analysis of state-reported race and ethnicity information.

4. The director of the C.D.C. issued an impassioned warning about a possible fourth surge of the coronavirus, and President Biden, above, called on governors and mayors to maintain or reinstate mask-wearing orders.

The seven-day average of daily new virus cases as of Sunday was 63,000, up from 54,000 two weeks earlier, according to a Times database. The nation has “so much reason for hope,” the C.D.C. director, Dr. Rochelle Walensky, said. “But right now I’m scared.”

In Britain, officials began a gradual lifting of coronavirus restrictions today, after a stay-at-home order in force since early January. But doctors in the Paris region warned that hospitals there might soon be overwhelmed as a third wave of infections sweeps through.

A report on the origins of the coronavirus by the World Health Organization said that China — where the virus was first detected in late 2019 — still did not have the data or research to indicate how or when the virus began spreading. Some skeptics outside the country say that China may have more information than it admits.

5. Aided by the moon, the tides and human salvage teams, the giant ship blocking the Suez Canal was freed today.

Horns blared in celebration. But with hundreds of other ships backed up on either side of the canal, it could still be days before operations return to normal. The Ever Given had blocked the vital trade route for six days. Shipping analysts estimated the traffic jam was holding up nearly $10 billion in trade every day.

On social media, some said they were disappointed. “PUT IT BACK” became a tongue-in-cheek trending topic on Twitter.

6. The fallout from a series of defaults at a New York hedge fund reverberated through markets.

Shares in Credit Suisse, the Swiss bank, dropped 11.5 percent on Monday, and the Japanese bank Nomura closed 14 percent lower, after the banks said they could face significant losses because of defaults by Archegos Capital Management. Other global banks tried to size up their exposure to the firm’s string of bad bets.

Archegos manages the wealth of Bill Hwang, a former hedge fund manager at Tiger Asia Management who was found guilty of wire fraud in 2012. The firm was forced into stock sales worth about $20 billion after bets the fund made moved the wrong way, Bloomberg News reported.

U.S. stocks recovered from early losses, with broad indexes almost even by day’s end.

7. Teenage brains may be especially vulnerable to marijuana and other drugs.

A new analysis of U.S. data concludes that adolescents and teenagers who experiment with marijuana and prescription drugs are more likely to get hooked than young people who are college-aged or older.

Dr. Nora Volkow, a senior author of the new study, cautioned parents not to dismiss marijuana use in teenagers and adolescents as harmless. “It’s a learning process when you become addicted,” she said. “That occurs much faster in an adolescent brain.”

8. The Elite Eight in the N.C.A.A. men’s basketball tournament gets underway tonight, with Baylor, one of the top seeds, meeting Arkansas and Oregon State playing Houston. Above, U.S.C.’s victory over Oregon on Sunday.

In the women’s tournament, tonight’s Elite Eight games are Connecticut-Baylor — a showdown of first- and second-seeded teams — and Indiana-Arizona.

In soccer, a new-look Champions League is set to be approved by the leaders of European soccer’s governing body as soon as this week. The competition will expand to 36 teams from 32 and dispense with a group-stage format in favor of a single league table.

9. An oboe maker who toiled along the Hudson River produced so few of his instruments that customers might have to wait a decade for one. They say it was worth the wait.

The craftsman, Paul Laubin, above, who learned his trade from his father, died at age 88 on March 1 at his Peekskill, N.Y., workshop, a dusty place lined with machines built as long ago as 1881.

“There is something that strikes a chord deep in your body when you play a Laubin,” said an oboist with the New York Philharmonic. “You get addicted to making that kind of a sound and nothing else will do.”

10. And finally, the cicadas are coming. Billions of them.

The swarms of cicadas, part of a group called Brood X, which emerges from below ground every 17 years, are expected to appear in 18 states in the next few weeks. Above, the last sighting, in 2004, in Washington, D.C.

The timing varies by location. In the Mid-Atlantic region, the soil is usually warm enough by about the third week of May.

Cicadas can injure small trees from their munching but cause no harm to humans — except for their annoying mating calls, which can be deafening.

Matt Kasson, a professor of forest pathology at West Virginia University, said we should consider ourselves lucky to witness the phenomenon. “It’s really something to marvel at,” he said.

Have an awe-inspiring evening.

Your Evening Briefing is posted at 6 p.m. Eastern.

Want to catch up on past briefings? You can browse them here.

What did you like? What do you want to see here? Let us know at briefing@nytimes.com.

PHOTO:  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Joshua Rashaad McFadden for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)