Scenes from the early days of the pandemic are being replayed, as Americans wait for hours in snaking lines to get a test.

This is the Coronavirus Briefing, an informed guide to the global outbreak. Sign up here to get the briefing by email.

•President Jair Bolsonaro of Brazil has tested positive for the coronavirus, after months of downplaying the seriousness of the pandemic.•The Trump administration gave formal notice of U.S. withdrawal from the World Health Organization, effective next year.•The U.S. government will pay the drugmaker Novavax$1.6 billion to make 100 million doses of a coronavirus vaccine by the beginning of next year.•Get the latest updates here, plus maps and a tracker for U.S. metro areas.

President Jair Bolsonaro of Brazil has tested positive for the coronavirus, after months of downplaying the seriousness of the pandemic.

The Trump administration gave formal notice of U.S. withdrawal from the World Health Organization, effective next year.

The U.S. government will pay the drugmaker Novavax$1.6 billion to make 100 million doses of a coronavirus vaccine by the beginning of next year.

Get the latest updates here, plus maps and a tracker for U.S. metro areas.

The dire state of testing

It’s déjà vu. With cases rising in 37 states, scenes from the early days of the pandemic — when people waited for hours in snaking lines to get a test — are being replayed in many parts of the country. Though the U.S. has greatly ramped up its testing capability, performing nearly three times as many tests in June as in April, a surge of infections has ushered in a new crisis.

In New Orleans, one testing site ran out of tests five minutes after it opened yesterday. Arizona, which once had a stockpile of testing supplies, has run out of basic items since new cases began spiking last month. In Idaho, where the state lab has been swamped, officials told long-term care facilities that the state could no longer meet all their testing needs.

Experts say that fast, widely available testing is critical for stamping out the virus, but officials in some areas have had to return to former restrictions, limiting tests to only those with symptoms.

The lack of federal coordination has left some states and cities competing for resources, and makers of high-volume testing machines have started prioritizing sales to states with bigger outbreaks.

New York City was able to boost its capacity to 30,000 tests per day only after it created its own testing kits and partnered with private labs — and even then, the numbers have lagged far behind other countries, particularly in Asia, where cities have tested millions of people in a matter of days.

The future of testing: Researchers around the world are racing to develop reliable “point-of-care” tests that give results in under an hour and could be done in a doctor’s office or even at home. The rapid tests on the market today are often inaccurate, and the new ones are still months away from being in clinics.

A cautionary tale from Sweden

The decision to forgo a lockdown in Sweden was expected to spare the country from financial devastation, but it hasn’t worked out that way. Not only is Sweden’s death rate from the virus disproportionately high, but its economy has suffered similarly to its Scandinavian neighbors, which enacted aggressive early measures to control outbreaks — and have had far fewer deaths.

Sweden is a cautionary case study for places hoping for an economic revival as they reopen prematurely or trying to avoid another shutdown despite surging new cases. The Swedish economy is expected to shrink 4.5 percent this year, compared to 4.1 percent in Denmark and 3.9 percent in Norway. Unemployment has also increased. “They literally gained nothing,” one researcher said.

How could this happen in a country that remained open? The virus seems to be the real enemy of economic prosperity, not stay-at-home orders. Sweden’s manufacturing sector has been shut down by holes in the supply chain. And while stores and restaurants can continue to welcome consumers, many people have been scared off. Credit data from one of the largest banks in Scandinavia shows that Swedes cut back on spending by 25 percent from mid-March to April — nearly as much as Danes during the same period.

Resurgences

•In Florida, more than 40 hospitals across the state reported having no more beds available in their adult intensive care units. The state added more than 7,300 new cases on Tuesday.•The virus death toll in India surpassed 20,000. With more than 719,500 cases, the country has overtaken Russia to become the third hardest-hit, after the United States and Brazil.•Melbourne, Australia’s second-biggest city, will be locked down for six weeks after a record daily tally of new cases, officials said today.

In Florida, more than 40 hospitals across the state reported having no more beds available in their adult intensive care units. The state added more than 7,300 new cases on Tuesday.

The virus death toll in India surpassed 20,000. With more than 719,500 cases, the country has overtaken Russia to become the third hardest-hit, after the United States and Brazil.

Melbourne, Australia’s second-biggest city, will be locked down for six weeks after a record daily tally of new cases, officials said today.

Here’s a roundup of restrictions in all 50 states.

What else we’re following

•Dr. Deborah L. Birx, the Trump administration’s coronavirus response coordinator, conceded that “none of us really anticipated the amount of community spread that began in really our 18-to-35-year-old age group.”•Scientists from the World Health Organization will travel to China this weekend to begin an investigation into the origin of the coronavirus.•Nurses who came to New York to battle the coronavirus are facing a new challenge: persuading family and friends back home that the virus is not a hoax.•New York City lost a million jobs when it shut down nearly four months ago, and its unemployment rate is still hovering near 20 percent — a figure not seen since the Great Depression.•After hundreds of experts called for the W.H.O. to review its guidelines on airborne transmission, the organization acknowledged that airborne transmission may be important indoors.•A herdsman in the Chinese region of Inner Mongolia was infected with bubonic plague, a reminder of how even as the world battles a pandemic, old threats remain.•New data shows that young people are more likely to move out because of the pandemic than other age groups.

Dr. Deborah L. Birx, the Trump administration’s coronavirus response coordinator, conceded that “none of us really anticipated the amount of community spread that began in really our 18-to-35-year-old age group.”

Scientists from the World Health Organization will travel to China this weekend to begin an investigation into the origin of the coronavirus.

Nurses who came to New York to battle the coronavirus are facing a new challenge: persuading family and friends back home that the virus is not a hoax.

New York City lost a million jobs when it shut down nearly four months ago, and its unemployment rate is still hovering near 20 percent — a figure not seen since the Great Depression.

After hundreds of experts called for the W.H.O. to review its guidelines on airborne transmission, the organization acknowledged that airborne transmission may be important indoors.

A herdsman in the Chinese region of Inner Mongolia was infected with bubonic plague, a reminder of how even as the world battles a pandemic, old threats remain.

New data shows that young people are more likely to move out because of the pandemic than other age groups.

What you’re doing

Every day I triage and treat people with Covid-19 and a variety of other medical problems via telemedicine while “working from home.” I had no idea when I started doing this what an important role telemedicine would come to play in the pandemic.

— Dr. Mark L. Friedman, Newbury, N.H.

Let us know how you’re dealing with the outbreak. Send us a response here, and we may feature it in an upcoming newsletter.

Sign up here to get the briefing by email.

PHOTO:  (PHOTOGRAPH BY  FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)