“Queer Eye” is back, alongside a great new “30 for 30” documentary. And CNN and “Sesame Street” host another town hall.

Every Monday, Wednesday and Friday, our TV critic Margaret Lyons offers hyper-specific viewing recommendations in our Watching newsletter. Read her latest picks below, and sign up for the Watching newsletter here.

This weekend I have … an hour, and I need a makeover

‘Queer Eye’

When to watch: Season 5 arrives Friday, on Netflix.

The “Queer Eye” feel-good empowerment formula is pretty locked at this point, and this new batch of episodes, filmed in Philadelphia, has all the life-changing haircuts you could hope for. Of course I cried many times. Sometimes, though, there’s something uncomfortable about framing healing as entertainment. “For me to get Noah to a place where he can accept his present and start working on a better future, he has to resolve the trauma from his past,” Karamo Brown says in the first episode, which is true and significant — but also strange to hear in the intonation of a game show host who’s encouraging you to come back after this commercial break.

… an hour, and I have young children

‘Coming Together: Standing Up to Racism’When to watch: Saturday at 10 a.m., on CNN, or on CNN.com.

This is the second CNN-“Sesame Street” town hall; the first was in late April, called “The ABCs of Covid-19,” and it was gentle and informative if also totally shattering in its own way. This new installment, moderated by Big Bird, Van Jones and Erica Hill, will answer viewer-submitted questions. If you don’t have young children but still want something informative this weekend, there’s “Race Matters: America in Crisis,” a PBS NewsHour special, Friday at 9 p.m. (check local listings).

… two hours, and I like martial arts

‘Be Water’

When to watch: Sunday at 9 p.m., on ESPN.

This “30 for 30” is an often fascinating biography of the martial arts legend Bruce Lee, tracing his life and work with ample context and dazzling archival footage and photography. There are plenty of ideas here that could probably make for their own stand-alone pieces, but “Be Water” does an elegant job of threading Lee’s specific narrative with stories on broader subjects, including the origins and legacies of anti-Asian racism in America. If you are in the market for a satisfying, thoughtful and surprisingly relevant documentary — which I always am — this is your jam.

PHOTOS (PHOTOGRAPHS BY RYAN COLLERD/NETFLIX; CNN; BRUCE LEE FAMILY ARCHIVE, VIA ESPN)