His insistence that the danger was overseas and could be kept out led officials to downplay the disease’s spread and the need for tests.

On Jan. 20, the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention found for the first time that the Covid-19 coronavirus had infected an American, a man from Snohomish County, Wash., who had returned from China five days earlier.

“We have it totally under control,” President Trump said the next day. “It’s one person coming in from China. It’s going to be just fine.”

On Feb. 2, two days after the administration announced that it would restrict travel from China in response to the viral threat, the president said, “We pretty much shut it down coming in from China.”

Researchers now believe the outbreak that has killed 10 people in Washington may link back to the first patient in the state, suggesting the disease was spreading that whole time. Meanwhile, cases of unclear origin are now being identified all over the country.

Yet Mr. Trump has continued to claim that “we have it so well under control” and that his approach is succeeding “because of quick action on closing our borders,” and told reporters on Friday “           we’re doing a really good job in this country at keeping it down…a tremendous job.”

It’s no coincidence that the coronavirus has broken out across the country as the president has continued to brag about keeping the disease outside America’s border. Rather than vigorously preparing for a pandemic, federal officialsresponded in a way that suited the narrative Mr. Trump preferred, focusing most of their attention on travel restrictions, passenger screening and quarantine. Pretending we could wall out the virus not only gave the public a false sense of security, it also left the United States unready for the threat it now faces.

Robust overseas containment was a defensible first step — travel restrictions can delay the arrival and spread of an outbreak by a few weeks. Paired with the draconian measures imposed by China, this might have extended the window for strengthening domestic preparedness.

But buying time only matters if it is linked to a clear plan for enhancing readiness and a reliable surveillance strategy to signal whether containment is working. Neither of those things happened.

American hospital capacity is lean. The 46,500 beds in intensive care in the United States are mostly occupied. Covid-19, if uncontrolled, might lead to up to 1.9 million I.C.U. admissions, according to            projections presented to the American Hospital Association. With sufficient notice, hospitals could have begun reallocating space and resources to expand intensive care, as well as establishing pandemic preparedness committees, reinforcing infection prevention and determining how to ethically allocate finite treatment resources if overwhelmed.

But hospital executives need a clear signal from federal authorities to trigger these costly and burdensome measures. And there was no such signal. Instead, federal authorities spoke of a low risk to the United States. Rather than urging specific actions, they passively suggested that hospitals “review” their crisis plans.

State and local health departments, underfunded and not set up to handle pandemic threats on their own, became more involved with traveler screening and quarantine than with preparing hospitals and high-risk facilities like nursing homes.

In keeping with the narrative that the virus could be walled off, the administration decreed that only those who had traveled from China, been in contact with someone who had traveled to China or had been exposed to a lab-confirmed Covid-19 case would be tested. This left officials blind to the domestic spread that was already occurring. It was not until Wednesday that the C.D.C. finally said that anyone showing symptoms of the disease could be tested (but implementation of this remains slow).

Compounding the problem was a decision by the C.D.C. to develop its own test standard, rather than rely on the kits approved by the World Health Organization and distributed to over 50 countries. When the C.D.C. test kits proved flawed, expansion of testing across the country was delayed for weeks. Without C.D.C. test kits, and with no other testing option approved by the Food and Drug Administration for domestic use, hospitals were forced to mail samples to the C.D.C. and wait days for results. Many hospitals had to discharge suspected cases back into the community when they did not fit the narrow testing criteria.

Neither impediment should have been difficult to fix. But rather than borrow approaches used elsewhere in the world — like drive-through testing in South Korea, or the W.H.O.-approved kits — the administration waited for the C.D.C. to resolve the flaws in its own kits. It has been almost two months since the W.H.O. published testing guidance, and the United States remains unable to test at scale.

This lack of urgency on testing is defensible only if one accepts the administration’s political narrative: The disease comes from China, so if we cut off travel from China, surveil for cases linked to China, and see none, we must be succeeding. This became the self-sustaining logic at the heart of the narrative.

It is stunning that no one in the administration’s leadership team recognized the vulnerability of this approach.

Good crisis management must constantly re-examine its assumptions. During the Obama administration, I coordinated the Agency for International Development’s West African operations to end the 2014 Ebola outbreak. We constantly thought about potential weaknesses in our strategy. The White House’s “Ebola czar,” Ron Klain, was notorious for pressing agencies to review potential weaknesses in strategy, demonstrate that they were thinking around corners and test underlying presumptions. My team once spent a weekend gaming out what would happen if commercial air travel to West Africa was shut down. We did not expect this to happen, but if it had it would have torpedoed our entire strategy by keeping us from moving Ebola responders in and out of the region.

The Trump administration failed to apply another lesson of the Ebola fight: Overseas containment and domestic readiness go hand in hand. The two cases of Ebola transmission in Dallas in October 2014 revealed that hospitals were not always ready to manage new infectious threats. After those incidents, the Obama administration began investing in health systems readiness and created a new team on the National Security Council to coordinate readiness for outbreaks abroad and at home. Yet, in an astonishingly shortsighted move, John Bolton dissolved that directorate upon his arrival as national security adviser. The White House followed this up by allowing post-Ebola investments in            American and            global outbreak readiness to lapse after their Obama-era funds began expiring.

We’re seeing the results of these cascading mistakes. In California, 124 health care staff members went into self-quarantine, unable to do their jobs, after exposure to a single person who had gone untested because of C.D.C. guidelines. A transmission cluster in a Kirkland, Wash., nursing home exposed numerous staff members and residents and forced a quarter of the town’s firefighters into isolation. Nurses in California have            bemoaned the lack of supportand advance planning, which has put them at risk. Twitter has been full of complaints about people with Covid-19-like symptoms unable to access testing.

What’s most infuriating is that these risks were widely predicted by experts outside government. To give but one example, two people who had served in the Trump administration — the former Food and Drug Administration commissioner Scott Gottlieb and a former National Security Council official, Luciana Borio — wrote in The Wall Street Journal on Jan. 28 that the United States should immediately scale up testing and get the hospital system ready.

The strategic miscues, the surveillance failures and the lack of attention to domestic readiness all flow from the same source: a White House strategy driven more by a political narrative than public health expertise.

Many officials have a hand in this mess, but the president is the crucial variable. Errors happen in any crisis. But when a president insists on claiming success irrespective of reality, it becomes much harder for those under him to acknowledge and correct mistakes. When he shows more interest in calming markets than in protecting Americans, he makes it very hard for senior public health officials to take aggressive action. (Mr. Trump reportedly became furious after a senior C.D.C. official’s prescient comments on looming risks sent markets tumbling.)

As Dr. Anthony Fauci of the National Institutes of Health told Politico in an interview last week, there is always a strong pull “to tell the president what you think he wants to hear,” even as officials have to “walk the fine balance of making sure you continue to tell the truth.” These things should not be mutually exclusive in a public health emergency.

The leadership changes announced by the president last week — shifting control to Vice President Mike Pence and bringing in a seasoned health official like Ambassador Deborah Birx of the AIDS preparedness program Pepfar — are a positive step toward rebuilding White House capacities that were dissolved during Mr. Bolton’s tenure.

But simply reshuffling the leadership team will not get this response back on track.

It is time to reckon with reality. The disease is spreading in the homeland. Vaccines will not be available any time soon. The health system is nowhere near ready, and our federal response has lost valuable time that it cannot get back.

Acknowledging and addressing these hard facts is a vital precondition to rebuilding a strategy that can realistically succeed.

Jeremy Konyndyk is a senior policy fellow at the Center for Global Development. From 2013 to 2017 he served as director of the Agency for International Development’s Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance.

The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We’d like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some            tips. And here’s our email:            letters@nytimes.com.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook,            Twitter (@NYTopinion) and            Instagram.

PHOTO: President Trump speaking to the media before a visit to the National Institutes of Health for an update on the coronavirus. A month earlier, he said, “We pretty much shut it down coming in from China.” (PHOTOGRAPH BY T.J. Kirkpatrick for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)