It will require swift, clear and aggressive action, but the country can avoid a worst-case scenario.

In times of national crisis, the American people look to our president for leadership and direction. Until recently, President Trump had confronted few, if any, significant national security challenges that were not substantially of his own making. Then came the Covid-19 pandemic, and suddenly the health of all Americans depends on the competence of the president and his team to confront this deadly global threat.

So far, the Trump administration has failed miserably. The number of cases in the United States is growing exponentially, and our health system is ill equipped to determine the scope of the disease or to treat the explosion of serious cases that will almost certainly soon present.

There are steps the administration could take to reduce the impact of the greatest public health crisis in decades. But we should understand what has gone so badly wrong. Broadly speaking, the Trump administration made four major mistakes.

First, Mr. Trump and his team failed to prepare for the probability that they would face a major global health challenge. Rather than heed the warnings, embrace the planning and preserve the structures and budgets that had been bequeathed to him, the president ignored the risk of a pandemic. Last week, at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Mr. Trump said, “you can never really think” that a pandemic like the coronavirus “is going to happen.” Having combated the H1N1 swine flu pandemic, Ebola, Zika, MERS and other such threats, many health experts and the Obama administration not only foresaw such risks but prepared for them.

In 2014, President Barack Obama founded the Global Health Security Agenda to rally developed countries to help many of the least-developed countries build their capacities to detect, contain and combat diseases before they spread widely. Under President Trump, much of the funding for the C.D.C., United States Agency for International Development and other agencies for that and related initiatives was cut.

As Mr. Obama’s national security adviser, I established the office of Global Health Security and Biodefense at the National Security Council to monitor, prepare for and prevent global health crises. In 2018, my successor dismantled the office, pushed its leader, Rear Adm. R. Timothy Ziemer, out and downgraded the position of Homeland Security adviser. During the transition in January 2017, the Obama team provided briefing papers and conducted a side-by-side exercise with leaders of the incoming Trump administration focused on pandemic threats. Like much of the assistance we offered, it was discarded by the incoming team.

Second, consistent with his nationalistic, xenophobic orientation, Mr. Trump has portrayed the virus that causes Covid-19 as a “foreign virus.” In reality, viruses know no nationality and respect no borders. Demonizing foreigners, denigrating people of different religions and hues, building walls and restricting immigration are not effective ways to combat a pandemic. Nor do they solve our economic challenges or assuage those uncomfortable with our growing racial diversity.

No American lives have been saved by blaming China for the origin or spread of the virus. A containment strategy predicated on keeping certain foreigners out, if swiftly and properly executed, might have bought American authorities some time to prepare for the inevitable domestic outbreaks, but it could never prevent the emergence of such a highly transmissible disease. Unfortunately, whatever time might have been gained by halting most travel from China was not used to speed domestic preparedness.

In the same vein, Mr. Trump just announced a counterproductive and ineffectual suspension of travel from much of Europe. By refusing to consult or even warn our closest allies, the United States alienated partners whose cooperation we always need to confront global challenges, including the coronavirus. Moreover, the virus is already prevalent across the United States, and its magnitude will only grow. Mr. Trump’s arbitrary travel ban on Europeans, which inexplicably excludes Britain and Ireland, is rife with as many holes as Swiss cheese. Merely another feckless, if costly, way of blaming foreigners for our own problems, it does nothing to address the crisis already in our midst.

Third, we have little idea of how bad the pandemic is. That’s because the Trump administration has failed to make a sufficient supply of test kits available in a timely manner. So countless Americans who fear infection and present symptoms but cannot demonstrate travel-related risk or exposure to someone infected are not being tested.

Again, xenophobia and arrogance seem to have put our citizens at greater risk. Rather than request the German-made test kits offered by the World Health Organization, which countries around the world have used broadly and effectively, the Trump administration insisted on using only U.S.-made kits. The            C.D.C then bungled the manufacture and distribution of its kits and only belatedly enlisted outside laboratories. The lack of testing remains the greatest failure of the administration’s response.

Fourth, President Trump has misled and outright lied to the American people about the severity of the coronavirus, while his sycophantic acolytes have followed suit. The White House silenced experts like Dr. Nancy Messonnier at the C.D.C. and improperly            classified deliberations on the disease response. Dr. Anthony Fauci, a deeply experienced professional with enormous integrity who is the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, stands out for            consistently telling the truth.

On Wednesday, President Trump started to come clean, warning older Americans to “avoid nonessential travel in crowded areas” and workers to stay home if ill. But after weeks of the president deliberately disseminating misinformation, many Americans underestimate the danger and have been slow to take necessary precautions.

As a result of these accumulated failures, many more Americans will fall ill and die than might have been the case, and the economic impact will be worse than necessary.

Yet, there is still limited time to avoid the worst-case scenario if the White House moves very quickly.

Most immediately, the federal government must make millions of test kits available to all who need them at no cost to patients, including by calling on the W.H.O to help. It must speed the preparedness of hospitals and health care workers to ensure there are sufficient beds, ventilators and protective equipment to treat the imminent influx of the very ill. To fully engage the Federal Emergency Management Agency and accelerate the deployment of critical resources, the president should declare a national emergency now. (Mr. Trump declared a national emergency and announced several other steps to speed coronavirus response and testing at a news conference Friday afternoon.)

Next and critically important, the federal, state and local governments must swiftly mandate rigorous social distancing. To the greatest extent possible, all Americans should avoid sizable gatherings and crowded places, especially older adults and those with underlying health conditions. Not only should the sick and those close to them stay home, but we all should avoid concerts, large religious gatherings, sporting events, conferences and the like. Major league sports and the N.C.A.A. have led by example. School closings, as disruptive and costly as they are, can be critically important in limiting community spread.

Aggressive social distancing is our last key tool for slowing the spread of the coronavirus in the United States. If cities and states can “flatten the curve” of infections so that hospitals and health systems are not overwhelmed, we can better treat the very ill and delay the onset of many infections into a period when there are therapeutic treatments and a vaccine.

The severe economic impacts of the coronavirus must be relieved through urgent financial support to workers, caregivers, small businesses and the uninsured, as well as to companies. Paid leave, food assistance, affordable testing and treatment, and increased unemployment insurance are among the many accommodations Congress and the administration must immediately enact to assist the most vulnerable.

Last, the United States can’t defeat any pandemic alone. Even for the most nationalistic, this crisis should explode the myth of “America First.” So long as the virus is prevalent anywhere, it is a threat everywhere. That is why we must cooperate with partners globally and invest in helping other countries to contain this and future pandemics.

Viruses are equal-opportunity killers. They don’t care whether you live in a red state or a blue state, in countries President Trump denigrates or the richest nations on earth. Viruses underscore the reality that in many ways, whether we like it or not, in this country and on this planet, we sink or swim together.

The sooner we have leadership that recognizes this reality, the safer Americans will be.

The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We’d like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some            tips. And here’s our email:            letters@nytimes.com.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook,            Twitter (@NYTopinion) and            Instagram.

PHOTO: President Trump met with bankers about the Covid-19 response at the White House on Wednesday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Doug Mills/The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)