He worked night shifts as a pharmacist so that he could spend time scouring Georgia for unseen birds. He died of complications of Covid-19.

This obituary is part of a series about people who have died in the coronavirus pandemic. Read about others here.

Walter Chambers caught the birding bug as a boy growing up in Columbus, Ga.

It all started when his older brother, Alan, took him on a wildlife and birding tour of a swamp along the Chattahoochee River. As they sat in the sun that day, Walter marveled at the majestic water birds he observed through binoculars that he could barely hold in his small hands.

He grew up to become a passionate bird watcher devoted to scouring Georgia for every kind of avian specimen imaginable. Mr. Chambers woke up at dawn to drive to national parks, dense forests and obscure meadows, where he remained for hours in hopes of photographing elusive birds. He worked for years as a pharmacist at a CVS, securing long night shifts so that he could build up time off for birding trips.

He became an accomplished member of the Southeast’s birding community, claiming several regional firsts. In 2010, he documented a rare ivory gull in West Point Lake, Ga., which was said to be the southernmost sighting of the bird in history. That same year, he heard an unfamiliar bird call on Dowdell’s Knob mountain, and he followed the sound until he encountered its origin: a red-faced warbler. The sighting is considered the first ever documented in Georgia.

“There’s a lot of birders who just want to chase interesting birds found somewhere else,” said Mitchell Jarrett, a friend and fellow birder. “Walter wasn’t like those people, and he was an unsung hero in that sense. Those people say, ‘There’s no interesting birds where I live.’ His thinking was, ‘No, you’re just not out there looking for them.’”

Mr. Chambers died on Feb. 8 at a hospital in Columbus. He was 46. The cause was complications of Covid-19, his brother, Alan Chambers, said.

Walter Frank Chambers was born in Columbus on June 4, 1974 to James and Pamela (Clapp) Chambers. His mother was a math teacher, his father a science teacher. Walter attended Harris County High School.

He graduated in 1999 from Columbus State University with a bachelor’s degree in chemistry and received a doctorate in pharmacy from Mercer University’s College of Pharmacy in Atlanta in 2008. His marriage to Julie Ballenger in 2002 ended in divorce.

In addition to his brother, he is survived by his mother, Pamela Crank.

Last winter, Mr. Chambers took his brother on a birding trip to Badlands National Park in South Dakota. They began driving toward the park’s canyons at 6 a.m. When they passed a flock of brown birds nestling in grass, Mr. Chambers told his brother to stop the car. He approached the birds, identifying them as sharp-tailed grouse, and he yelped in excitement. He had never encountered one before.

“I thought he’d seen every bird in North America,” his brother said. “To me, they were just shadows in the road. I think Walt was able to see what other people didn’t see. He was conscious that if you stick around and be quiet, things will come out for the person who is willing to look for them.”

PHOTO: Walter Chambers arranged his work schedule as a pharmacist to allow time for birding trips. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MITCHELL JARRETT)