MOTOR VEHICLES

Korean Automakers Agree to Civil Penalty

Hyundai Motor Co and Kia Motors' U.S. units on Friday agreed to a record $210 million civil penalty after U.S. auto safety regulators said they failed to recall 1.6 million vehicles for engine issues in a timely fashion.

The U.S. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) said the two Korean automakers agreed to consent orders after it said they had inaccurately reported some information to the agency regarding the recalls.

Hyundai agreed to a total civil penalty of $140 million, including an upfront payment of $54 million; Kia's civil penalty totals $70 million, including an upfront payment of $27 million.

''It's critical that manufacturers appropriately recognize the urgency of their safety recall responsibilities and provide timely and candid information to the agency about all safety issues,'' said NHTSA Deputy Administrator James Owens.

Kia said in statement it ''denied the allegations but agreed to settle the matter to avoid a protracted dispute with the government.'' REUTERS

INTERNATIONAL TRADE

China Adds Wine to List Of Barred Aussie Imports

China on Friday added wine to the growing list of Australian goods barred from its markets in a trade war over disputes including its support for a probe into the origin of the coronavirus.

The Ministry of Commerce imposed import taxes of up to 212.1 percent, effective Saturday, which Australia's trade minister said make Australian wine unsellable in China, his country's biggest export market.

Earlier, China stopped or reduced imports of beef, coal, barley, seafood, sugar and timber from Australia after it supported calls for a probe into the origin of the coronavirus pandemic.

China's ruling Communist Party is trying to deflect criticism of its handling of the outbreak, which plunged the global economy into its deepest slump since the 1930s, by arguing the virus came from abroad.

The Ministry of Commerce said the wine tariffs are in response to complaints that Chinese producers were damaged by improperly low-priced Australian imports.

Australia's government denied subsidizing wine exports. ASSOCIATED PRESS

THEME PARKS

Disney Announces  4,000 Additional Layoffs

The Walt Disney Co. announced plans to lay off 4,000 more employees largely because of the effects of the Covid-19 pandemic.

The announcement was made in a U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission filing this week, saying 32,000 employees at the parks, experience and products division will be terminated in the first half of fiscal year 2021. The company said it also put 37,000 employees not scheduled for termination on furlough.

''Due to the current climate, including Covid-19 impacts, and changing environment in which we are operating, the company has generated efficiencies in its staffing, including limiting hiring to critical business roles, furloughs and reductions-in-force,'' the document said.

Disney's parks closed in March as the pandemic started spreading in the U.S. The Florida parks reopened in the summer, but the California parks have yet to reopen pending state and local government approvals. ASSOCIATED PRESS





