Visitors who break Hawaii’s 14-day quarantine rule may get an unwelcome gift: A free flight home.

In Hawaii, the spirit of aloha normally greets visitors with warmth and welcome. Now, while the state has discouraged visitors by requiring them to self-quarantine for 14 days, that culture of generosity might extend to a free return ticket home.

With a $25,000 grant from the Hawaii Tourism Authority, the nonprofit Visitor Aloha Society of Hawaii (VASH) has instituted a Covid-19 flight assistance program to return travelers who don’t have the means to follow the mandatory 14-day quarantine — including paying for lodging and food delivery — required of incoming visitors.

Since launching the program on April 6, the organization has sent 20 visitors to their airport of origin, including travelers from Guam, Los Angeles, Birmingham, Ala., and Denver.

“The majority of travelers we have sent back in my opinion have been irresponsible in traveling to Hawaii during the Covid-19 pandemic when they know we are trying to keep Hawaii safe from the spread of this disease,” said Jessica Lani Rich, the president and chief executive of VASH. The organization normally provides visitor support, including translation assistance and help with funeral arrangements.

Though visitor arrivals are down nearly 99 percent, some residents have reported seeing visitors on beaches despite quarantine restrictions and stay-at-home orders. All beaches in Hawaii are closed, though individuals may cross them either to swim, paddle or surf while observing social distancing.

“They either don’t get or are ignoring the message,” Lynne Matusow, a Honolulu resident, wrote in an email to The New York Times. “We have locals, in masks, scolding them for sitting on beaches, with towels, umbrellas, coolers, etc. That is forbidden.”

Ms. Rich said some of the visitors VASH has returned home have told her they were taking advantage of low airfares. A round-trip ticket on Southwest Airlines from Oakland, Calif., to Honolulu, for example, was recently priced at $238 for travel in May.

On April 22, nearly one month after the governor, David Ige, announced the mandatory 14-day quarantine restriction for incoming arrivals, the Hawaii Tourism Authority said a total of 421 passengers arrived via air, 109 of whom were nonresident visitors. The number of tourists among them is unknown. The tourism authority counts anyone without Hawaii state identification as a visitor, noting that visitors might include an essential health care or disaster assistance worker, or Hawaii natives now residing on the mainland and returning to stay with family.

“I see maybe one or two tourists a day,” said Ryan Houser, a restaurant “fish sommelier” and Waikiki resident, noting that he can usually spot a tourist by their hotel towel and water floatie from the popular souvenir chain ABC Stores.

“It’s a little offensive,” he added. “I would love to go to the beach every single day if I could but I want to minimize the Covid-19 spread and make sure the curve stays flat.”

According to the state Department of Health, Hawaii has 596 cases of Covid-19 — four newly reported — and 12 deaths as of April 23.

In a highly publicized case this week, the local TV station KHONreported on a couple who were cited on Oahu for violating quarantine more than once.

“Our residents had to close their businesses and have financial hardships and to have people come here right now and want to vacation, it is reckless,” Ms. Rich said, noting her organization did not pay for the couple, believed to be from Nevada and Australia, to leave. “Hawaii is known for aloha spirit. Let us get through this hardship then we’ll welcome you back with aloha.”

Efforts to shut down tourism, Hawaii’s economic engine, began March 17 when the governor asked travelers to voluntarily postpone trips for 30 days. On March 26, he imposed the 14-day self-quarantine for both visitors and returning residents. The quarantine and stay-at-home orders are currently in effect until April 30.

Jake Shimabakuro, the popular ukulele musician and Honolulu resident, said he had joined an initiative asking vacationers to postpone trips to the island.

“As much as we want tourists to come and enjoy all that Hawai’i has to offer, we need to protect our hospitality service workers and at-risk community, especially our seniors,” he wrote in an email.

Away from the most populous island, things are quieter. On Kauai, Judi Glass, a local travel adviser, praised the island’s mayor with enacting a nightly curfew on March 20, about a week before the state’s quarantine rule. Kauai has had 21 cases of Covid-19 and no deaths.

“We have none of the daily traffic, and it is so peaceful and quiet now,” she wrote in an email.

Follow New York Times Travel onInstagram,Twitter andFacebook. Andsign up for our weekly Travel Dispatch newsletter to receive expert tips on traveling smarter and inspiration for your next vacation.

PHOTO: A Honolulu beach before the coronavirus. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Marco Garcia for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)