Public health experts are concerned that mass demonstrations could seed a possible second wave of infections.

This is the Coronavirus Briefing, an informed guide to the global outbreak. Sign up here to get the briefing by email.

•The Congressional Budget Office projected that the virus would cost the U.S. economy $7.9 trillion over the next decade.•An international team of scientists used genetic analysis to trace the likely origin of the novel coronavirus to horseshoe bats.•Get the latest updates here, as well as maps and a tracker for U.S. metro areas.

The Congressional Budget Office projected that the virus would cost the U.S. economy $7.9 trillion over the next decade.

An international team of scientists used genetic analysis to trace the likely origin of the novel coronavirus to horseshoe bats.

Get the latest updates here, as well as maps and a tracker for U.S. metro areas.

Protesting in a pandemic

The mass protests against police brutality and racism roiling dozens of cities across the United States have prompted officials and public health experts to warn of a possible second wave of coronavirus outbreaks.

Even though many protesters have taken precautions — like wearing masks and trying to stay socially distant — gatherings of thousands of people will inescapably carry risk: Shouting, panting and yelling slogans can accelerate the production of respiratory droplets that transmit the virus.

The aggressive police response in many cities may also be increasing transmission. Tear gas and pepper spray provoke secretions from the eyes, nose and mouth, and induce coughing; police efforts to corral protesters in tight urban corridors reduce the distance between people; and jailing protesters expands the potential for the virus to spread.

The protests come as many areas of the country are still experiencing the most lethal days of the pandemic. While coronavirus cases are dropping in the Northeast, there are fierce flare-ups in rural parts of Southern states like Alabama, Louisiana and Mississippi. And the Midwest is still troubled by persistent outbreaks: In Wisconsin, hospitalizations are on the rise, and in Minnesota, where the protests began, cases are trending upward.

While the demonstrations were ignited by the death of George Floyd last week, they are also channeling the outrage felt by those who have seen the virus lay bare entrenched inequalities in American society. Covid-19 kills black Americans at a higher rate than whites, and it has stripped black Americans of their jobs and income at an outsize rate.

For many who came out to protest, the virus was the lesser of two risks.

“I can go home, clean myself up, go get tested, make sure I take proper precautions,” a protester told NBC. “But police brutality, I don’t know, I don’t know what I can’t do to not be harassed.”

A hidden toll

It’s not just the coronavirus: In New York and New Jersey, the two hardest-hit states, thousands more people than usual have died in the past few months from causes like heart disease, diabetes and Alzheimer’s disease.

Experts say some of these deaths, which started to rise in early March, may be undiagnosed Covid-19 cases. It’s also possible that some patients with chronic illnesses may have chosen to stay home rather than risk exposure to the virus by going to the hospital.

Reopenings

•Students were allowed to return to some elementary schools in England, but many parents decided to keep their children home anyway.•South Africa lifted its ban on alcohol sales. The deeply unpopular measure was credited with a drop in murders and traffic accidents in the country.•Michiganlifted its stay-at-home order and will allow groups of up to 100 people to gather outdoors while social distancing. Restaurants will also be able to open as long as tables are six feet apart.•Despite the continuing outbreaks in parts of Mississippi, Gov. Tate Reeves announced that all businesses could reopen and travel restrictions had been lifted.

Students were allowed to return to some elementary schools in England, but many parents decided to keep their children home anyway.

South Africa lifted its ban on alcohol sales. The deeply unpopular measure was credited with a drop in murders and traffic accidents in the country.

Michiganlifted its stay-at-home order and will allow groups of up to 100 people to gather outdoors while social distancing. Restaurants will also be able to open as long as tables are six feet apart.

Despite the continuing outbreaks in parts of Mississippi, Gov. Tate Reeves announced that all businesses could reopen and travel restrictions had been lifted.

Here’s a roundup of restrictions in all 50 states.

What else we’re following

•The United States has delivered two million doses of hydroxychloroquine to Brazil for use in the fight against the virus, the White House announced on Sunday, despite widespread concern that it may not be effective, or even safe, for patients.•From an underground flood wall in Connecticut to the resettlement of a coastal Louisiana community, climate change projects in more than a dozen states are now in jeopardy because of the pandemic.•At least 26,000 nursing home residents in the U.S. have died during the pandemic, The Washington Post reports.•Despite a soaring unemployment rate and millions of new jobless claims each week, people are still paying their rent. But there are signs that may slip as federal relief programs expire.•A small amount of the virus was detected in a 2-year-old pug in North Carolina, but the U.S.D.A. later found the dog was not infected with the coronavirus.•The Metropolitan Opera announced that the pandemic had forced the company to cancel its fall season.

The United States has delivered two million doses of hydroxychloroquine to Brazil for use in the fight against the virus, the White House announced on Sunday, despite widespread concern that it may not be effective, or even safe, for patients.

From an underground flood wall in Connecticut to the resettlement of a coastal Louisiana community, climate change projects in more than a dozen states are now in jeopardy because of the pandemic.

At least 26,000 nursing home residents in the U.S. have died during the pandemic, The Washington Post reports.

Despite a soaring unemployment rate and millions of new jobless claims each week, people are still paying their rent. But there are signs that may slip as federal relief programs expire.

A small amount of the virus was detected in a 2-year-old pug in North Carolina, but the U.S.D.A. later found the dog was not infected with the coronavirus.

The Metropolitan Opera announced that the pandemic had forced the company to cancel its fall season.

What you’re doing

My cousin and I decided to spruce up the graves of our beloved mothers and fathers. I can’t tell you how satisfying and rewarding it was to plant those marigolds and geraniums, mulch and finish it off with American flags (both our fathers served their country)! We reminisced and learned things about each other we had long forgotten.

— Lois Gambino Adamson, Otisville, N.Y.

Let us know how you’re dealing with the outbreak. Send us a response here, and we may feature it in an upcoming newsletter.

Sign up here to get the briefing by email.

Tom Wright-Piersanti contributed to today’s newsletter.

PHOTO:  (PHOTOGRAPH BY The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)