Trump wears a mask publicly for the first time. Disney World reopened, despite a surge in Florida. Thousands of Israelis protested the government’s handling of the economy.

This briefing has ended. Follow the latest news on the coronavirus outbreak.

Trump wears a mask on a visit to a military medical center.

President Trump on Saturday wore a mask in public for the first time, after repeated urging from aides that it was a necessary message to send to Americans resistant to covering their faces.

Mr. Trump wore a dark mask affixed with the presidential seal during a visit to the Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, where he planned to visit wounded troops. He was surrounded by Secret Service agents and others also wearing masks.

Anticipation over whether he would wear a mask had been building, after the president had repeatedly dismissed suggestions that he wear a mask, frequently appearing in public spaces without one, mocking those who did and ignoring public health rules in several states.

But as the pandemic has spread to states with large numbers of Republican voters, Mr. Trump had signaled more recently that he was more open to masks, and told reporters he planned to wear a mask on the visit to the medical center. Before going there, he stopped to speak with reporters at the White House.

“I’ll probably have a mask, if you must know,” Mr. Trump said. “I think when you’re in a hospital, especially in that particular setting where you’re talking to a lot of soldiers and people that in some cases just got off the operating tables. I think it’s a great thing to wear a mask. I’ve never been against masks, but I do believe they have a time and a place.”

Weeks ago, the president took a mask off before seeing reporters during a tour of a Ford plant in Michigan, in violation of factory policy, which he said he did to avoid being photographed with it on. Last month he refused to wear a mask at a factory in Maine that produced coronavirus testing swabs, forcing the manufacturer to dump products made during a demonstration for the president. And in May, he did not wear a mask during a visit to a Honeywell mask factory in Phoenix, Ariz., despite signage in the building asking visitors and workers to do so at all times.

Masks were scarce at recent Trump campaign events in Oklahoma, Arizona and South Dakota.

In contrast to Mr. Trump’s reluctance, a growing number of governors, both Republican and Democratic, and even Vice President Mike Pence have taken up the cause in recent weeks. Gov. Doug Ducey of Arizona and Gov. Brian Kemp of Georgia are among the chorus of Republican officials who have encouraged their constituents to actively cover their faces in public.

In Louisiana, Gov. John Bel Edwards on Saturday said almost all residents must wear a mask in public. Gov. Greg Abbott of Texas, a Republican, recently issued a similar order.

Senators Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, Lamar Alexander of Tennessee and Mitt Romney of Utah have also called on the president to wear face coverings, at least as a symbolic gesture. Gov. Andrew Cuomo has also implored the president to wear one.

In an interview this month, Mr. Trump said he “would wear one if I were in a group of people and I was close,” adding that he “sort of liked” the way he looked.

“It was a dark black mask,” he said at the time, “and I thought it looked OK. I looked like the Lone Ranger.”

Louisiana orders bars closed and South Carolina breaks records.

As the national death toll mounts and the coronavirus continues its surge across the Sun Belt, the governor of Louisiana on Saturday ordered bars to close and most residents to wear a mask outside. The state had an early outbreak that then receded, before a recent spike in cases and hospitalizations.

South Carolina announced its highest single-day total for coronavirus cases on Saturday, recording more than 2,200 infections; its previous record was set on July 4 with 1,854 new cases. More than 22 percent of tests in the state came back positive on Friday — the highest positivity rate for the state yet, according to health officials.

North Carolina, Oregon, Arkansas, Hawaii and Alaska also recorded single-day highs Saturday. More than 60,000 new coronavirus cases were announced in the U.S. on Saturday, more than any day of the pandemic except Friday, when the country recorded more than 68,000 — setting a single-day record for the seventh time in 11 days.

The country’s seven-day death average reached 642 on Friday, up from 471 on July 5, but still a fraction of the more than 2,200 deaths the country averaged each day in mid-April, when the outbreak in the Northeast was at its worst. And eight states set single-day death records this week: Alabama, Arizona, Florida, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Dakota, Texas and Tennessee.

South Carolina and Florida were among the first states to reopen and are now among the worst-hit states. Floridahit daily records twice in the last 10 days, and has surpassed 10,000 daily cases five times in that period, announcing 10,360 new infections on Saturday.

In South Carolina, National Guard troops were expected to be called in to help hospitals in the state handle the increased strain on the health care system. The Department of Health and Environmental Control reported the first death of a child in the state, according to a news release. The child was younger than 5 and from the Midlands region of the state, according to the release, which did not otherwise identify the child.

South Carolina has had more than 54,000 coronavirus cases and more than 950 deaths as of Saturday, according to a New York Times database.

Gov. Henry McMaster announced that the sale of alcohol in all bars and restaurants would be prohibited after 11 p.m., beginning Saturday night. Mr. McMaster said he hoped the move would help reduce transmission among young adults. More than 20 percent of the state’s confirmed cases are in people ages 21 to 30, health officials said.

Florida and Texasclosed bars again last month, and bars across Las Vegas and Reno shut down for the second time at midnight on Friday. Public health experts have said the virus has spread quickly through bars because people linger, drink and often have to shout or get closer to hear each other over blaring music.

Louisiana has more cases per capita than all but New York and New Jersey, and on Friday, the state recorded more than 2,600 positive tests, more than any day since April 2.

“It’s become clear to me, especially after the numbers that we saw yesterday, that our current restrictions are not enough,” Mr. Edwards, a Democrat, said at a news conference announcing the order. He said that more than 10 percent of the people who were being tested were testing positive.

The governor said that Louisianians over the age of 8 must wear a mask when they are not able to socially distance from other people, unless they have a health condition. Local parishes can opt out, but only if they hit certain requirements, Mr. Edwards said, noting that only three were in that position on Saturday.

Several states and cities are rolling back their reopenings or even contemplating locking down again.

In Texas, which reported record numbers of daily cases four times this week, Gov. Abbott signaled Friday the possibility of a new economic “lockdown” if the state cannot curtail its outbreak.

In Georgia, Atlanta officials said Friday they were preparing to shift back to “Phase 1” guidelines, which call for residents to largely stay at home. Most of Georgia’s cases have been concentrated in the counties making up the Atlanta metropolitan area.

In New Mexico, Gov. Michelle Lujan Grisham said this week that emergency public health restrictions would be reinstated on Monday, including prohibitions on indoor dining and barring out-of-state visitors to New Mexico’s state parks.

Thousands of Israelis take to the streets, demanding Netanyahu ‘get the money flowing.’

More than 10,000 Israelis whose livelihoods have imploded because of the coronavirus erupted in rage over the government’s economic policies at a protest Saturday night that filled Rabin Square in downtown Tel Aviv.

Actors, nightclub owners, hotel and domestic workers and people from countless other walks of life demanded that Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu “get the money flowing,” likening their struggle to a war, but one for bread — a staple that is Israeli shorthand for economic anxieties.

Masks were in abundance but distance between protesters was not. The police said they had authorized 1,800 people to attend the demonstration but the crowd overflowed the two-city-block plaza in front of City Hall.

Mr. Netanyahu, whose management of the pandemic was already under assault — the infection is spreading in Israel faster than ever — had tried hard to defuse the protest in meetings on Friday, the Israeli news media reported. But its organizers refused to call it off.

The unemployment rate is 21 percent, with more than 850,000 Israelis jobless. But differences in the way different categories of workers are protected are leaving the self-employed, small-business owners and unsalaried workers with far less of a safety net than those whose companies put them on unpaid leave.

Mr. Netanyahu announced Thursday that the self-employed would receive more than $2,100 by next week, but protesters said earlier rounds of subsidies were too little and had arrived too late. “Enough with the lies!” read one sign.

“We need the money now, not tomorrow,” said Avinoam Nehamad, who owns a tourism company, according to Walla News.

In Serbia, thousands of protesters also demonstrated outside Parliament for the fourth consecutive night on Friday, ignoring a ban on gatherings of more than 10 people. The rallies — set off by an announcement of since-aborted plans to reinstate a total lockdown in Belgrade, the capital — quickly evolved into protests over democratic backsliding in recent years under President Aleksandar Vucic, his approach to Kosovo, and the inconsistent and politicized ways in which his government has imposed social restrictions during the pandemic.

At least 60 are infected on two Marine bases on Okinawa.

At least 60 people on two Marine bases on the southern Japanese island of Okinawa have been infected with the coronavirus, according to Marine officials.

A spokesman for the Marines said that commanders had enacted “soft shelter-in-place orders” at the bases, Camp Hansen and Marine Corps Air Station Futenma, and that only essential personnel would be permitted to enter and leave those areas as the authorities sought to curb the spread of the virus.

“Cleaning teams have been dispatched and thorough contact tracing is ongoing to identify and isolate those who may have come in contact with infected personnel,” a spokesman for the Marines, Major Kenneth Kunze, said in a statement on Saturday.

A Marine familiar with the situation, speaking on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to speak publicly, said that it was likely that the virus was transmitted to at least one of the bases after a unit recently deployed there in mid-June, part of the Marine Corps unit program that regularly sends troops to Okinawa to train and deploy throughout the region. It is believed that some of those deployed in the unit contracted the virus after sneaking off the base for July 4 celebrations, according to the Marine as well as a notice sent by a Marine official.

“Okinawans are shocked by what we were told” by the U.S. military about the outbreak, the Okinawa governor, Denny Tamaki, told a news conference, according to The Associated Press. He questioned disease prevention measures taken by the U.S. military.

Bollywood’s biggest star tests positive for the virus.

On a day when India reported more than 28,000 new coronavirus infections, one case in particular caught the whole country’s attention: Amitabh Bachchan, a Bollywood star and one of India’s most revered figures.

Mr. Bachchan, known as Big B, announced on Saturday to his 43 million followers on Twitter that he had tested positive and urged his recent contacts to get tested themselves. His son, Abhishek, also an actor, disclosed that he was positive as well. Both appear to have only mild symptoms.

India is now racking up more new reported infections each day than any other country except the United States and Brazil. It also has the third-highest total number of infections after those same two countries, with about 850,000 confirmed cases and more than 22,000 deaths. Hospitals in India are overflowing to the point that pregnant women have died in labor after being turned away.

The surge in cases has led officials around India to reimpose restrictions after attempting to loosen things up to stimulate a critically wounded economy. The borders between states are being rigorously patrolled, and international travel is still closed. But the density of India’s population makes it difficult to practice social distancing in cities like Mumbai, home to Mr. Bachchan.

It’s hard to overstate how big Big B really is, having appeared in more than 200 films over the past 50 years.

“He’s like god,” said Shivendra Singh Dungarpur, a filmmaker who has worked with him. “I’ve never seen a star having such power, such credibility. He’s the biggest superstar this country has ever, ever seen.”

Mr. Bachchan’s illness might create more fear across India. But Mr. Dungarpur predicted that many Indians would find his struggle inspiring and say to themselves: “If Amitabh Bachchan can fight this, so can we.”

Other developments around the world:

•Australian citizens and residents traveling from overseas to New South Wales, which includes the city of Sydney, will be charged for their mandatory 14-day hotel quarantine starting July 18, the state premier said on Sunday. Everyone whose airline ticket was purchased after July 12 will have to pay 3,000 Australian dollars, or about $2,100, for the first adult, 1,000 dollars for each additional adult, and 500 dollars for each child 3 or older. Mandatory hotel quarantines at a similar cost to international arrivals are already in effect in Queensland and the Northern Territory, and other parts of the country are likely to begin charging travelers as well amid a new outbreak in Melbourne, Australia’s second-biggest city. On Friday, Australia said it would halve the number of people permitted to return each week to 4,000 from about 8,000. The border has been closed to nonresidents since March.•Xu Zhangrun, a law professor in Beijing who has criticized the Chinese government’s handling of the coronavirus outbreak, was released from detention on Sunday, a week after the police took him away.•In Hong Kong, a Department of Health spokeswoman said on Saturday that the latest outbreak in the semiautonomous Chinese territory was worse than an earlier peak in March because of a growing number of cases with unknown origins and growing clusters linked to housing estates, homes for older people and restaurants. Hong Kong recorded 28 new infections and 33 preliminary positive cases on Saturday, after a spike this week.•In France, the widow of a bus driver who was beaten to death after he asked four passengers to wear masks is demanding “exemplary punishment” for his attackers, The Associated Press reported on Saturday. Four people are in custody in relation to the July 5 attack on the driver, Philippe Monguillot, at a bus stop in the city of Bayonne. Mr. Monguillot had been hospitalized in critical condition, and his death was announced on Friday. His wife, Veronique Monguillot, said in a meeting with the French interior minister that she and their three daughters had been “destroyed” by the attack. “We must bang a fist on the table, so this never happens again,” she said.

Australian citizens and residents traveling from overseas to New South Wales, which includes the city of Sydney, will be charged for their mandatory 14-day hotel quarantine starting July 18, the state premier said on Sunday. Everyone whose airline ticket was purchased after July 12 will have to pay 3,000 Australian dollars, or about $2,100, for the first adult, 1,000 dollars for each additional adult, and 500 dollars for each child 3 or older. Mandatory hotel quarantines at a similar cost to international arrivals are already in effect in Queensland and the Northern Territory, and other parts of the country are likely to begin charging travelers as well amid a new outbreak in Melbourne, Australia’s second-biggest city. On Friday, Australia said it would halve the number of people permitted to return each week to 4,000 from about 8,000. The border has been closed to nonresidents since March.

Xu Zhangrun, a law professor in Beijing who has criticized the Chinese government’s handling of the coronavirus outbreak, was released from detention on Sunday, a week after the police took him away.

In Hong Kong, a Department of Health spokeswoman said on Saturday that the latest outbreak in the semiautonomous Chinese territory was worse than an earlier peak in March because of a growing number of cases with unknown origins and growing clusters linked to housing estates, homes for older people and restaurants. Hong Kong recorded 28 new infections and 33 preliminary positive cases on Saturday, after a spike this week.

In France, the widow of a bus driver who was beaten to death after he asked four passengers to wear masks is demanding “exemplary punishment” for his attackers, The Associated Press reported on Saturday. Four people are in custody in relation to the July 5 attack on the driver, Philippe Monguillot, at a bus stop in the city of Bayonne. Mr. Monguillot had been hospitalized in critical condition, and his death was announced on Friday. His wife, Veronique Monguillot, said in a meeting with the French interior minister that she and their three daughters had been “destroyed” by the attack. “We must bang a fist on the table, so this never happens again,” she said.

Disney World and other amusement parks open their doors despite surging cases.

Thousands of theme park fans turned out — in masks in the scorching Florida heat and amid a virus surge — for the reopening of Walt Disney World, a place designed to chase your troubles away. After closing in March because of the pandemic, the mega-resort near Orlando began tossing confetti again at 9 a.m.

Two of its four major parks, the Magic Kingdom and the Animal Kingdom, welcomed back a limited number of temperature-checked visitors, with some attractions and character interactions unavailable as safety precautions. Epcot and Disney’s Hollywood Studios were set to reopen on Wednesday. It amounted to a breathtaking effort by a corporation to prove that it can safely operate — entertaining families and employing tens of thousands of workers — at a highly dangerous time.

Other amusement parks are also opening. Dorney Park in Pennsylvania and Cedar Point in Ohio also announced they would open to all guests on Saturday, after exclusively allowing season pass holders for several days. SeaWorld Orlando also resumed operating its rides and marine exhibits on Saturday.

The reality of whether Disney succeeds in keeping its guests and employees safe will become clear in the weeks to come. Demand is also a question, especially since Disney World draws much of its attendance from the Northeast.

Earlier in the week, negative commentary about the reopening flooded Twitter. People used words like “irresponsible” and “disappointed” to describe Disney’s decision to stick to its reopening plans, announced in May, even as coronavirus cases surged.

The states have widely varying levels of transparency when it comes to Covid. Then there is Kansas.

There are 49 state governments that report the home county of people who die from the coronavirus. And then there is Kansas, which refuses to do so.

There are 49 state governments that update their coronavirus case totals at least five times a week. And then there is Kansas, which forgoes updates on Tuesdays, Thursdays and weekends.

As Kansas’ case numbers surge to record levels — more than 4,000 infections have been announced already this month, including spikes around Wichita, Lawrence and the Kansas City suburbs — the state sticks out for its opacity.

Since early in the pandemic, Gov. Laura Kelly’s administration has refused to release the names of meatpacking plants tied to thousands of cases, citing privacy concerns. In neighboring Colorado and Missouri, state officials have provided detailed accounts of similar outbreaks.

Officials at the Kansas Department of Health and Environment use the same reason — patient privacy — for refusing to say which of the state’s 105 counties are reporting coronavirus deaths. All other states have long provided county-level death details. In Kansas, it is up to local officials to decide whether to release that information.

The state government has stuck by its policies even as outbreaks have emerged at Kansas bars, churches and colleges, and as officials in several counties have overturned Ms. Kelly’s order requiring masks.

Until mid-May, Kansas updated its public data every day, like almost every other state. But for nearly two months, state-level updates have come only three times a week. That has left Kansans with less frequent information at the same time that Republicans in the state have tried to curb the emergency authority of Ms. Kelly, a Democrat, and as officials in many counties have disregarded her reopening plan.

Kristi Zears, a state health department spokeswoman, said the decision to cut back on public updates allowed officials to focus on other aspects of the coronavirus response, and that it had not slowed the pace of case investigations.

“With the increasing number of outbreaks and increasing requests from local health departments to assist with case investigations and contact tracing, we shifted more focus on assisting counties,” Ms. Zears said in an email.

Science and other countries offer lessons about reopening U.S. schools.

As school districts across the United States consider whether and how to restart in-person classes, they face two fundamental uncertainties: No nation has tried to send children back to school with the virus raging at levels like America’s, and the scientific research about transmission in classrooms is limited.

The World Health Organization has concluded that the virus is airborne in crowded, indoor spaces with poor ventilation, a description that fits many American schools, and many of the country’s 3.5 million teachers are feeling under siege, under pressure from the White House, pediatricians and some parents to resume normal teaching.

“I’m just going to say it: It feels like we’re playing Russian roulette with our kids and our staff,” said Robin Cogan, a nurse at the Yorkship School in Camden, N.J., who serves on the state’s committee on reopening schools.

Three science reporters for The Times, Pam Belluck, Apoorva Mandavilli and Benedict Carey, reviewed relevant studies from around the world. The data, they write, clearly shows that children are far less likely than adults to become seriously ill from the virus. And some research suggests younger children are less likely than teenagers to infect others, though the evidence is not conclusive.

Countries like Norway and Denmark reopened schools after reducing infection levels, and have not seen a surge in cases. They initially opened only for younger children, strengthened sanitizing procedures, and have kept class size limited, children in small groups at recess and space between desks.

The larger concern is that children could become infected, many with no symptoms, and then spread the virus to others, including family members, teachers and other school employees. In Israel, the virus infected more than 200 students and staff after schools reopened in early May and lifted limits on class size a few weeks later, according to a report by University of Washington researchers.

On the other hand, a study in Ireland of six infected people — two high school students, an elementary student and three adults — who spent time in schools before they closed in March found that the only documented transmission involved one of the adults, and outside of school.

California, after riding a boom, reckons with hard times.

When California shut down its economy in March, it became a model for painful but aggressive action to counter the virus. The implicit trade-off was that a lot of upfront pain would help slow the spread, allowing the state to reopen sooner and more triumphantly than places that failed to act as decisively.

But the virus had other plans. California is now averaging about 8,000 new cases a day, and the state’s economy is in retrenchment mode again.

Unemployment, which was 3.9 percent in February, the lowest on record, shot up to 16.3 percent by May, compared with 13.3 percent nationwide. Container traffic at the Ports of Los Angeles and Long Beach is down about a third from a year ago, while many beaches and attractions like Disneyland were closed on July Fourth and are delaying their reopening plans. Most dispiriting is the sense that even after politicians made tough calls that Californians largely supported, the economy seems no better off.

Andrew Snow, who owns the Golden Squirrel, a restaurant and bar in Oakland’s Rockridge neighborhood, cut his staff of 28 people to two after the pandemic hit. But thanks to takeout orders, a new line of business selling groceries and the resumption of outdoor service, he recently brought two back, and was set to bump that figure to six or eight by the July Fourth weekend.

But business is slowing again, as California is averaging about 8,000 new cases a day, about triple the level a month ago. Mr. Snow’s plans to bring back workers over the holiday weekend didn’t come to pass, and he has put further hiring on hold.

“People are scared,” he said. “The math for having more people doesn’t work out anymore.”

A Scottish pilot who became an emblem of Vietnam’s virus fight leaves the hospital.

A Scottish pilot in Vietnam who spent more than two months on life support after contracting Covid-19 and became the subject of nationwide public interest was released from the hospital on Saturday and headed to the airport for his return home.

The case of the pilot, Stephen Cameron, 43, has come to exemplify Vietnam’s all-out effort to beat the coronavirus, with the state news media in the Communist country covering his treatment extensively. Mr. Cameron was so seriously ill at one point that doctors contemplated a double lung transplant.

“I have been overwhelmed by the generosity of the Vietnamese people, the dedication and professionalism of the doctors,” Mr. Cameron said before his departure, in a video released by Cho Ray Hospital, where he was treated. “The odds say that I shouldn’t be here, and so I can only thank everybody here for doing what they have done.”

Vietnam has been among the most successful countries in tackling the virus. It is the largest country not to have reported a single Covid-19 death. No cases of local transmission have been reported since mid-April. And just 369 cases in total have been confirmed in the country of more than 97 million people.

Known as Patient 91, Mr. Cameron arrived in Ho Chi Minh City in February to take a job with Vietnam Airlines. He tested positive for the virus in March after visiting a bar that emerged as the center of Vietnam’s biggest coronavirus cluster.

Doctors at Cho Ray Hospital, in Ho Chi Minh City, said he was now free of the virus. But he faces a long recovery period after spending two months in a medically induced coma.

A Facebook video posted by the hospital on July 3 showed him lying in bed surrounded by doctors and other workers, who applauded his progress as he answered simple questions and tested the strength in his legs.

Berlin soccer team aims to win fans back with 20,000 free coronavirus tests for every game.

The German soccer club Union Berlin wants its fans back, and soon. And to do so, it plans to offer free coronavirus tests to more than 20,000 fans so they can fill up its stadium’s seats when the next season starts in September.

From setting up contact tracing to allowing a limited amount of fans in stands, clubs across Europe have studied various alternatives to let people watch their teams play in stadiums.

If carried out, Union Berlin’s plan would be a first. The club said ticket holders would have to test negative for the coronavirus within 24 hours of the game and bring the test’s result along with their ticket.

When most European countries were in the early stages of the pandemic, some soccer games in late February and early March contributed to the spread of the virus, before leagues suspended their seasons — or canceled them altogether.

With games now played behind closed doors, stadiums have been depleted of those who once made them roar and bristle with life. And for many, the financial loss caused by the absence of tickets sales is critical.

Most of the 22,000 seats in Union Berlin’s stadium are terraces on which fans stand close together, so social distancing is not feasible, the club’s president, Dirk Zingler, said in a statement announcing the free coronavirus tests.

“And if we aren’t allowed to sing and shout, then it’s not Union,” he said.

Beyond the logistics and cost of providing over 20,000 tests several times a month, the club may run into other obstacles: Large gatherings are banned in Berlin until Oct. 24, and even with tests, crowds could prove risky.

In Switzerland, FC Zurich had to postpone two games after it said on Saturday that several members of its staff and at least one player had tested positive for the coronavirus, in what may await other teams as they finish the current season.

‘I couldn’t do anything’: Revisiting the suicide of an E.R. doctor in New York.

On an afternoon in early April, while New York City was in the throes of what would be the deadliest days of the pandemic, Dr. Lorna M. Breen found herself alone in the still of her apartment in Manhattan.

She picked up her phone and dialed her younger sister, Jennifer Feist, as she did nearly every day. Lately, their conversations had been bleak.

Dr. Breen, 49, supervised the emergency department at NewYork-Presbyterian Allen Hospital in Upper Manhattan. The unit had become a brutal battleground, with supplies depleting at a distressing rate and doctors — herself among them — and nurses falling ill. The waiting room was perpetually overcrowded. The sick were dying unnoticed.

When Dr. Breen called this time, she sounded odd. Her voice was distant, as if she was in shock.

“I don’t know what to do,” she said. “I can’t get out of the chair.” Her sister helped to get her into a psychiatric ward.

More than 50 family members, friends and current and former colleagues told Dr. Breen’s story to three reporters for The Times: Corina Knoll, Ali Watkins and Michael Rothfeld. They painted a picture of a consummate overachiever. Gifted, confident, clever. Unflappable.

She planned thrilling trips, joined a ski club, played cello in an orchestra, took salsa classes and attended Redeemer Presbyterian, a church that attracted high-achieving professionals. Once a year, she gathered all her social circles at a party on her rooftop.

In late February, when elected leaders were still assuring the public that the virus did not pose a serious threat, she became convinced it would catch hospitals off guard. And it did, inundating emergency rooms like hers with desperately ill people. There would be bodies every day. Ultimately, during the worst of the crisis, almost a quarter of the people who were admitted to the Allen to be treated for Covid-19 would die.

On April 26, Dr. Breen killed herself. Her family believes she should be counted among the pandemic’s casualties. That she was destroyed by the sheer number of people she could not save. That she was mortified to have cried for help.

“Lorna kept saying, ‘I think everybody knows I’m struggling,’” her sister said. “She was so embarrassed.”

New York is loosening a ban on nursing home visitations.

The New York State Department of Health announced on Friday that residents in certain nursing homes would be allowed to have visitors, after being all but cut off to outside guests during the early months of the pandemic.

New York originally barred visitors at nursing homes on March 13 over fears they would spread the virus among older people, whom epidemiologists consider to be at an elevated risk of developing life-threatening complications.

To date, about 42 percent of deaths in the United States have been linked to nursing homes and long-term care facilities, including more than 6,400 residents or staff members in New York. The toll in New York nursing homes accounts for more than one-tenth of the reported deaths in such facilities across the country.

Only those facilities that have gone without any new coronavirus cases among residents and staff for at least 28 days will be eligible to receive visitors, according to the announcement. Even then, only 10 percent of residents at eligible facilities will be allowed to host visitors at the same time.

Residents can have visits from up to two individuals at a time, one of whom must be at least 18 years of age. Visitors also will be asked to go through a familiar array of health screenings, including temperature checks at entrances, and to wear face coverings and socially distance while inside.

A spokeswoman for the Health Department said that roughly 150 of the more than 600 nursing homes in New York could soon qualify to accept visitors, according to a report from The Associated Press.

Graffiti is back in virus-torn New York.

While most New Yorkers grudgingly accepted New York City’s lockdown in March, one community eagerly embraced it: graffiti writers. Deserted commercial streets with gated storefronts offered thousands of blank canvases.

From the South Bronx to East New York, a new generation of graffiti writers has emerged, many of whom have never hit a trainyard or the inside of a subway car. But like early taggers who grew up in a city beset by crime, grime and empty coffers, today’s generation is dealing with its own intense fears over the devastating effects of the coronavirus on communities and the economy.

“Does art dictate the times or do the times dictate art?” said John Matos, 58, a graffiti writer known as Crash who started out in the 1970s. “Before now, the streets were sanitized, with pieces that were cool and nice, and done with permission. Now, we’re back to the roots.”

Concerns over the virus, as well as the death of George Floyd and others at the hands of the police, have been reflected in the pieces showing up around the city. But a lot of the new tags around town are, on their face, apolitical, though the mere act of writing on a wall is a political statement in itself.

“The whole thing with quarantine is that people feel powerless because daily life and activity is very different,” said Eric Felisbret, the author of “Graffiti New York,” who took up aerosol art as a teenager on the Lower East Side. “They can’t control anything. But they can get out there and bomb — that’s something they can control.”

Delayed by the coronavirus, U.S. tax day is almost here.

Because of the pandemic, the Treasury Department postponed the traditional April 15 federal tax filing deadline until July 15 — and this time there is no wiggle room. Last month, the Internal Revenue Service said there would not be another blanket filing delay.

So for anyone who has not yet filed a return — or filed but not yet paid the taxes owed for 2019 — the deadline is Wednesday.

“It’s just like April 15, but in July,” said Cindy Hockenberry, the director of tax research and government relations for the National Association of Tax Professionals, a trade group.

In Latin America, the pandemic turns back a hard march toward equality.

Not long ago, Colombia and Latin America more broadly were in the middle of a history-making transformation: The scourge of inequality was shrinking like never before. Over the past 20 years, millions of families had marched out of poverty in one of the most unequal regions on Earth. The gap between rich and poor in Latin America fell to its lowest point on record.

Now, the pandemic is threatening to reverse those gains like nothing else in recent history, economists say, potentially upending politics and entire societies for years to come.

To document this critical moment, two Times reporters, Julie Turkewitz and Sofía Villamil, and a photographer, Federico Rios, traveled more than 1,000 miles across Colombia. Throughout the journey, they witnessed a swift collapse of prosperity.

Small businesses had closed for good. Universities were hemorrhaging students. Schools that had turned the children of construction workers into engineers were near collapse, unable to pay teachers. Farmers were burning their crops, ruined by disrupted markets. Parents began rationing medicine to their children, unsure when they would have money for more.

Yet while some families sold their cellphones to buy dinner, wealthy people retreated to countryside homes.

“It was never my dream to go backward,” said David Aguirre, 32, who had risen from a low-level bodyguard to the boss of his own strawberry farm. “The sacrifice of many people, days of work from 6 to 6 at night, rain, sun. And then — for it all to become nothing?”

As the pandemic worsens hunger in New York City, many are stepping in to help.

The number of food-insecure New York City residents has doubled to about two million since the onset of the pandemic. But just as quickly as the need escalated, so, too, did new solutions.

Those who help feed the hungry are up early, clipboards in hand, checking on deliveries. They work the phones, begging for donations. They direct employees and a growing army of volunteers. And they try to keep their wits about them, despite the long hours, the long to-do lists and the long lines that are becoming all too common.

Red Rabbit, a Harlem-based company that was founded in 2005 by the Wall Street equities trader Rhys Powell to provide meals for schoolchildren, was serving 22,000 meals and snacks a day when schools were shut down in March.

Since then, Red Rabbit has started making meals for adults for the first time, with meals distributed to emergency workers, their children and others in the community. Now, 90,000 meals are prepared weekly.

And in late March, the Rev. Andrew Marko, the pastor of Evangel Church in Queens, converted the 100,000-square-foot building that houses the church and shuttered school into a mammoth operation to feed those in need.

Pastor Marko is constantly on the phone to chase down donations. “I’m the food crier,” he said, marveling at how the effort has taken on a life of its own. “I feel like I’m on the back of a speedboat and not sure who’s driving.”

Yet the results are profound.

“We’ve moved almost three million pounds of food since the crisis started,” Pastor Marko said.

How to experience cultural institutions from home.

Museums and production companies are offering many online options.

Reporting was contributed by Sarah Almukhtar, Tara Siegel Bernard, Pam Belluck, Nicholas Bogel-Burroughs, John Branch, Benedict Carey, Jeffrey Gettleman, Jenny Carolina González, Erica L. Green, Thomas Gibbons-Neff, Dana Goldstein, David Gonzalez, Maggie Haberman, David Halbfinger, Patrick Kingsley, Corina Knoll, Ron Lieber, Apoorva Mandavilli, Jane Margolies, Giulia McDonnell Nieto del Rio, Zach Montague, Aimee Ortiz, Richard C. Paddock, Federico Rios, Michael Rothfeld, Kai Schultz, Eliza Shapiro, Mitch Smith, Farah Stockman, Alix Strauss, Julie Turkewitz, Sofía Villamil and Ali Watkins.

PHOTO:  (PHOTOGRAPH BY The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)