The Cook County Board president says it has nothing to do with bail reform. Also: When voting results are delayed; Turkey's part in NATO; Hong Kong's postponed election.

To the Editor:

Like New York City (news article, Aug. 5), in Cook County, Illinois, we have seen a rise in shootings. Our efforts at bail reform, which have been progressing for years along with a corresponding drop in shootings, were suddenly blamed for the rise. The data we have clearly show that reform has had no impact on rates of re-arrest in general or re-arrest for violent offenses.

In Chicago and its suburbs, only 1 percent of those arrested on gun felonies in early 2020 have been arrested on similar charges recently, according to data from our state Attorney's Office.

The tendency for law enforcement to shift the blame to courts, which are simply following the law and best practices, is not productive. The recent rise in shootings during the Covid-19 pandemic has more readily traceable causes: rampant access to guns coupled with the economic crisis of a lifetime.

Moreover, there is the longstanding lack of economic opportunity and investment in these communities. These are not wholly or even mainly law enforcement's problems to solve but rather all of ours. We will not police our way out of this crisis.

Toni PreckwinkleChicagoThe writer is the Cook County Board president.

A Delay in Election Results? Fine

To the Editor:

The president has voiced concerns about mail-in voting, such as a delay in the results. He recently said: ''You could have a case where this election won't be decided on the evening of Nov. 3. This election could be decided two months later.''

This is a red herring. For much of our history, results of presidential elections were not known on Election Day or even the day after. Votes were tallied by hand, and tallies were sent to a central state-run authority and consolidated. The results were then made public.

Individual states would make the vote known locally. If you lived across the continent, you might not get the national totals for a month before the invention of the telegraph.

We now live in a society that demands instant gratification. TV reporters stand in the middle of the street at an incident. Cameras show flashing lights of police vehicles, and the reporter tells us that a crime was committed ''over there.''

It would be nice if we could wait for the story to develop, be filtered and then televised or published. Same with elections. Let the count take place in its own time. I can wait.

Richard RauschLynnwood, Wash.

From the Ambassador: Turkey's Role in NATO

To the Editor:

''For NATO, Aggression of Turkey Is Becoming 'Elephant in the Room''' (news article, Aug. 4) suggests that Turkey has thwarted the proper functioning of NATO and has blocked partnerships within the alliance. But Turkey defends NATO's priorities and works with its allies to safeguard NATO's solidarity and integrity. It is no secret, however, that many times we have been left alone to defend NATO's borders and prevent human suffering.

In Syria, for example, government forces were on the verge of launching a full-scale attack on Idlib Province, home to three million civilians, 100,000 of whom escaped. As President Trump emphasized, if it weren't for Turkey's intervention, thousands of innocent people would have been brutally killed. And the fact is that millions would have fled to Turkey and Europe as a result.

When the legitimate government of Libya asked its allies for concrete support, it was only Turkey that delivered it. Protecting Libya from turning into yet another hot spot of instability and humanitarian suffering in the Mediterranean remains the right thing to do. Our goal is to end an unnecessary war that puts the stability of NATO's southern flank at grave risk.

The article also calls Turkey's effort to defend its legitimate rights in the Eastern Mediterranean ''aggressive.'' Turkey has repeatedly called for dialogue even in the face of maximalist claims and unilateral actions by third parties.

Turkey is the backbone of NATO and will continue to stand guard at the front lines to confront threats to our collective security.

Serdar KilicWashingtonThe writer is Turkey's ambassador to the United States.

From Hong Kong: Why We Postponed Our Election

To the Editor:

The answer to the question raised by Fernando Cheung in ''Why Did Hong Kong Delay Its Election -- by a Year?'' (Op-Ed, nytimes.com, Aug. 2) is this: to protect public health and ensure fair elections.

Since July, Hong Kong has been battling a third wave of Covid-19 infections, our worst outbreak to date, which has resulted in our strictest containment measures yet. From July 1 to Aug. 3, Hong Kong saw more than 2,300 confirmed cases, almost twice as many as the preceding six months.

If not handled quickly and decisively, the current wave of infections could spiral out of control and overwhelm our public hospital system.

Given the increase in community transmissions, particularly those of unknown origin, meaningful electioneering activities are no longer possible. Stringent boundary-control measures make it impossible for registered Hong Kong voters to return from overseas or the mainland of China to cast their votes. Legal, practical and time constraints mean that extra polling days, postal voting and e-voting are also not possible.

The decision to postpone the Legislative Council election from Sept. 6, 2020, to Sept. 5, 2021, was taken to protect public health as well as the rights of Hong Kong voters.

Alongside public health, the Hong Kong government attaches the utmost importance to ensuring, and protecting, the constitutional right of Hong Kong people to take part in elections. This we will do freely, openly and in good faith in September next year.

Erick Tsang Kwok-waiHong KongThe writer is Hong Kong's secretary for constitutional and mainland affairs.





