Another poll shows President Trump and Joe Biden close in Texas. A Trump campaign ad targeting Latino voters portrayed Democrats as extremists as it denounced the Goya boycott.

[Follow the DNC Live: Biden’s speech, schedule, start time, streaming and more.]

In a speech with his attorney general, Trump repeats his message of ‘law and order.’

President Trump on Wednesday said that the Justice Department would send federal law enforcement officials to Democratic-led cities experiencing an increase in violent crime, including Chicago, and again tried to draw a direct line between a rise in violence and Democratic policies.

“There is simply no substitute for a police department that has the strong backing of local leaders,” Mr. Trump said.

Though violent crime is down overall, major cities across America, including Atlanta, Chicago and New York, have struggled with an increase in murders and gun violence, including the shooting of 14 people near a Chicago funeral home on Tuesday.

While some local officials, including those in Kansas City, Mo., have requested help from the federal government, others have pleaded for those resources to be funneled toward other initiatives besides putting federal officials, or even troops, on the ground.

“I welcome legitimate resources from the federal government to reduce violence,” J.B. Pritzker, the Democratic governor of Illinois, told reporters earlier Wednesday. “But what I will not stand for are efforts that undermine civil rights and civil liberties like what’s happening in Portland. Any effort from the federal government to undermine the basic freedoms this nation has in its best moments aspired to protect will be met with resistance from this state government.”

Mr. Trump, whom polls show is trailing former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., has sought to make law enforcement a central focus of his re-election effort by painting Democratic cities and policies as lawless.

By pushing forward with his federal response, named Operation Legend after LeGend Taliferro, a 4-year-old boy who was killed in June in Kansas City, Mr. Trump made what amounted to a direct move against several governors who have compared his decision to authoritarianism and threatened lawsuits, as well as Mayor Lori Lightfoot of Chicago, a Democrat who said Tuesday that “under no circumstances” would she allow federal troops to enter the city.

Operation Legend is separate from Mr. Trump’s recent decision to send federal agents to Portland, Ore., a move that has led to scenes of confrontations and chaos that, in turn, he and his White House aides have used to support a false narrative about Democratic elected officials allowing dangerous protesters to cause havoc.

Speaking after the president in the East Room, Mr. Trump’s attorney general, William P. Barr, tied the rise in violent crime in cities to protests that have demanded the defunding of police departments, and said that some 200 federal agents would be traveling to Chicago to work with local police.

“This rise,” Mr. Barr said, “is a direct result of the attack on the police forces and the weakening of police forces.”

Several cities that have attracted large-scale protests, including New York, Chicago and Minneapolis, have seen violent crime spike this summer, leading to a back-and-forth between police officers and activists about the root cause. Police officers in New York, for example, have said rerouting resources to protests caused a shortage in coverage in other areas, while critics have accused them of falling back amid increased scrutiny of inappropriate officer conduct.

But violent crime has also risen in Republican-led cities, a development covered less often by Mr. Trump and his advisers. Jacksonville, Fla., the site of the Republican National Convention next month, is experiencing one of its most lethal years in decades, with more than 100 homicides recorded.

In a coronavirus-focused briefing held later at the White House, Mr. Trump denied that his decision to send federal agents to Chicago was a political stunt. “The cities unfortunately that are in trouble are all run by Democrats,” he said. “You have radical left Democrats running cities like Chicago and so many others that we just had a news conference and unfortunately that’s the way it is.”

A new poll from Texas shows Trump and Biden neck-and-neck as concern about the pandemic rises.

A new poll from Texas by Quinnipiac University shows a very close race there between Mr. Trump and Mr. Biden, and rapidly increasing concern about how the state’s Republican governor is handling the coronavirus pandemic.

Seventy-four percent of voters surveyed said the virus was a serious problem in Texas, and 65 percent said it was “out of control.” A full two-thirds said they personally knew someone who had been diagnosed with Covid-19, nearly double the number who said the same in a Quinnipiac poll last month.

An overwhelming majority of Texans — 80 percent — said they supported Gov. Greg Abbott’s face-mask mandate. The prospect of a statewide stay-at-home order, however, was not popular: 53 percent opposed it, while 44 percent supported it.

Despite the popularity of the mask order, voters have become increasingly skeptical of Mr. Abbott’s overall handling of the pandemic since cases began skyrocketing in Texas last month. The new poll shows that 47 percent of Texans approve of his response, down from 56 percent in early June. Fifty-two percent said they thought Mr. Abbott had reopened Texas’ economy too quickly.

On the presidential race, 45 percent of voters said they supported Mr. Biden and 44 percent said they supported Mr. Trump. That’s almost identical to the results in last month’s Quinnipiac poll, and reaffirms that Texas, normally solidly Republican, is likely to be competitive in November.

The poll, conducted July 16-20, has a margin of error of plus or minus 3.3 percentage points.

New Trump ads criticize the Goya boycott and call Democrats ‘too extreme for Hispanic Americans.’

The battle over beans has come to the campaign airwaves. New Spanish-language advertisements released by the Trump campaign Wednesday attack Democrats over the boycott of Goya Foods, calling it a “shameful smear campaign” carried out by socialists and extremists in the party.

The boycott, which came after Goya’s chief executive, Robert Unanue, appeared in the Rose Garden and praised Mr. Trump, was quickly seized upon by the president’s supporters, who see it as part of “cancel culture.”

The single television ad, and three radio ads, will begin airing in Florida and expand to other regions, according to a statement from the campaign. The ads call Democrats “too extreme for Hispanic Americans.”

While Mr. Trump remains deeply unpopular among the vast majority of Latino voters, he has held on to steadfast support among roughly 25 percent of the population. Much of that support has come from Florida, where Hispanics make up roughly 18 percent of the vote and Cubans have long been seen as reliable Republicans.

The television advertisement flashes an image of Che Guevara, the communist revolutionary whom many immigrants from Cuba despise, and depicts a Cuban actress saying, “We sacrificed so much to be free and respected,” over footage of a Cuban refugee airlift. The ads also call the boycott an “acto de repudio,” or act of repudiation, a term typically used to describe violence or acts of humiliation against critics of the Cuban government.

“Oh man, all these leftists are the same,” one radio ad says. “They’re so intolerant. Imagine if they get more power. I came here to be free. I’m voting for Trump.”

The ads each target different segments of the Hispanic population, featuring slightly different language and accents for Cuban, Puerto Rican and Mexican audiences. The Biden campaign made a similar distinction in a series of advertisements released last month.

Biden calls Trump a ‘racist’ who is trying ‘to divide the country.’

Mr. Biden, who has not been shy about accusing Mr. Trump of sowing racial division, seemed to take his attacks a step further on Wednesday, accusing Mr. Trump of a platform “designed to divide the country.”

Mr. Biden made the comments during a Facebook meeting with members of Service Employees International Union, which represents nearly two million workers, many of them in health care.

“What President Trump has done in going, in his spreading of racism, the way he deals with people based on the color of their skin or national origin or where they’re from, is absolutely sickening,” Mr. Biden said.

His comment was in response to a Korean-American S.E.I.U. member from California, Suk Kim, a home care worker, who complained that Asians were being blamed for the pandemic because of the atmosphere the president had fostered, and “white people say the racist things because he thinks it’s OK.”

Mr. Biden was promoting his $775 billion plan for working parents and caregivers, a proposal that many S.E.I.U. members could benefit from. The organization endorsed Mr. Biden earlier this month.

Mr. Biden, who was more measured about Mr. Trump’s views on race before he became the presumptive Democratic nominee, went on to say that Mr. Trump was “blaming everything on China. He’s blaming everything on the Chinese, he’s blaming everything,” adding, “he’s just using it as a wedge.”

But Mr. Biden made a misstep, as critics pointed out on social media, by incorrectly labeling Mr. Trump as the first racist president.

“We’ve had racists, and they existed and they tried to get elected president,” Mr. Biden said. “He’s the first one that has. And the way he pits people against one another is all designed to divide the country.”

In fact, racism and the presidency have been closely linked since the earliest days of the republic. Several presidents, including George Washington, Thomas Jefferson and Andrew Jackson, were slaveholders.

Several modern presidents were unabashed in their feelings toward Black and brown people. Woodrow Wilson segregated the federal work force, while in 1971 Ronald Reagan, then the governor of California, on a private phone call with President Richard M. Nixon referred to African people as “monkeys,” a slur that made Mr. Nixon laugh.

A Biden aide, Symone Sanders, later told The Times, “There have been a number of racist American presidents, but Trump stands out — especially in modern history — because he made running on racism and division his calling card and won.”

Later on Wednesday, at a coronavirus-focused briefing at the White House, Mr. Trump responded to Mr. Biden’s claim by saying he “did criminal justice reform” and helped improve the economy for minorities.

“I’ve said this,” Mr. Trump said, “and I say it openly and not a lot of people dispute it. I have done more for Black Americans than anybody, with the possible exception of Abraham Lincoln.”

The president then abruptly ended the briefing.

‘This is not an apology,’ Ocasio-Cortez says, after Yoho denies calling her profane names.

Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez rejected a Republican colleague’s words of contrition on Wednesday after he denied referring to her with a sexist pair of expletives.

In a speech on the House floor on Wednesday, Representative Ted Yoho, Republican of Florida, expressed regret for injecting “strife” into Congress and being “abrupt” with Ms. Ocasio-Cortez outside the Capitol on Monday. But he later added, “The offensive name-calling words attributed to me by the press were never spoken to my colleagues, and if they were construed that way, I apologize for their misunderstanding.”

Ms. Ocasio-Cortez criticized Mr. Yoho following his speech. “This is not an apology,” she said on Twitter, adding that “I will not teach my nieces and young people watching” that such statements are something “they should learn to accept.”

She said that Mr. Yoho was lying when he described their interaction as a “conversation,” that it was in fact a “verbal assault” and that he was refusing to take responsibility for his actions.

“Yoho’s remarks were not directed to me,” she wrote. “He did not mention my name, nor did he acknowledge that I was even involved.”

In a confrontation on Monday reported by The Hill newspaper, Mr. Yoho approached Ms. Ocasio-Cortez, a favorite of the progressive left and a frequent target of Republicans, on the Capitol steps and told her she was “disgusting” for suggesting that poverty was driving crime in New York City.

The newspaper said in an account later shared by Ms. Ocasio-Cortez on Twitter that Mr. Yoho walked away from her, uttering a pair of expletives, including one often used to denigrate women.

In his remarks on Wednesday, Mr. Yoho said he was passionate about how Americans could rise out of poverty without resorting to lawbreaking, because he had experienced poverty himself.

“I cannot apologize for my passion or for loving my God, my family and my country,” Mr. Yoho said.

Obama steps up his 2020 involvement, recording a conversation with Biden.

Former President Barack Obama had a face-to-face — at times mask-to-mask — interaction with Mr. Biden earlier this month, their first since the start of the pandemic. A video of their “wide-ranging conversation” will be posted online Thursday.

The meticulously socially distanced chat, shot at Mr. Obama’s office in Washington, hit the themes both men struck in their most recent joint appearance online, including Mr. Trump’s handling of the coronavirus pandemic, as well as systemic racism and the economy, the Biden campaign said.

A one-minute teaser video released Wednesday shows the two men arriving for their conversation, masks on, then talking to each other, masks off, while seated far apart.

“Can you imagine standing up when you were president and saying, ‘It’s not my responsibility, I take no responsibility’?” Mr. Biden says.

“Those words didn’t come out of our mouths while we were in office,” Mr. Obama replies.

In another clip of the conversation released later on Wednesday, Mr. Biden said Mr. Trump had been “deliberately dividing people from the moment he came down that escalator, and I think people are now going, ‘I don’t want my kid growing up that way.’”

Mr. Obama responded by saying, in part, “The thing I’ve got confidence in, Joe, is your heart and your character, and the fact that you are going to be able to reassemble the kind of government that cares about people and brings people together.”

The video shoot was the first time the two men saw each other in person since Mr. Biden secured the nomination this spring; they talk on the phone frequently as Mr. Obama ramps up his involvement in a campaign he sees as central not only to the country’s future but a defense of his own legacy.

The release of the full video, tomorrow at 10 a.m., will be one of Mr. Obama’s most visible acts in the presidential race so far. Mr. Obama endorsed Mr. Biden in April, after the primary had effectively ended, and held a grass-roots virtual fund-raiser for him in June.

The two are planning another online fund-raiser next week, with tickets ranging from $250 to $250,000.

‘I wish her well’: Trump’s comment on Ghislaine Maxwell renews scrutiny of his Jeffrey Epstein ties.

Mr. Trump’s White House briefing on Tuesday took an unusual detour when he offered warm words for Ghislaine Maxwell, who is facing federal charges of helping Jeffrey Epstein recruit, groom and sexually abuse girls.

Mr. Trump’s comment about Ms. Maxwell came in response to a reporter’s question about whether he expected her to go public with the names of powerful men who have been accused in lawsuits of taking part in the sex-trafficking ring that Mr. Epstein allegedly ran.

“I don’t know,” Mr. Trump said. “I haven’t really been following it too much. I just wish her well, frankly.”

“I’ve met her numerous times over the years, especially since I lived in Palm Beach, and I guess they lived in Palm Beach,” the president continued, referring to the Florida town where his Mar-a-Lago resort is and where Mr. Epstein had a home. “But I wish her well, whatever it is.”

The remarks renewed attention on Mr. Trump’s ties to Mr. Epstein, who was charged with sexually exploiting and abusing dozens of girls and women and hanged himself in his jail cell last year.

Last July, Mr. Trump told reporters that he knew Mr. Epstein “like everybody in Palm Beach knew him” but that they had fallen out. “I haven’t spoken to him in 15 years,” he said. “I was not a fan of his, that I can tell you.” The circumstances of the apparent rupture in their relationship have never been made clear.

Those comments were a reversal from the opinion he expressed in 2002, when he told New York magazine that Mr. Epstein was a “terrific guy” whom he had known for 15 years.

“He’s a lot of fun to be with,” Mr. Trump said then. “It is even said that he likes beautiful women as much as I do, and many of them are on the younger side.”

Mr. Epstein was never a dues-paying Mar-a-Lago member, but Mr. Trump treated him like a close friend and the men were photographed together at the club in the 1990s and early 2000s.

Biden’s camp calls a senator’s Burisma investigation a ‘smear campaign’ to help Trump.

The Biden campaign is taking aim at Senator Ron Johnson, Republican of Wisconsin, for pursuing an investigation into Hunter Biden’s business dealings in Ukraine that the campaign claims is timed to help Mr. Trump during the homestretch of the presidential election.

In a memo provided to journalists that wasfirst reported by NBC News, Mr. Biden’s deputy campaign manager, Kate Bedingfield, questioned whether Mr. Johnson, chairman of the Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee, was reaching out to pro-Russian sources in Ukraine to obtain damaging information about the former vice president’s son.

Mr. Johnson is expected to issue subpoenas for officials who might have knowledge of the work the younger Mr. Biden performed when he was paid to advise the Ukrainian natural gas company Burisma.

Congressional Democrats, alarmed by the recent leak of edited tapes of private conversations between then-Vice President Biden and Ukrainian leaders, sent a letter to Christopher Wray, the F.B.I. director, this week raising the possibility that Mr. Johnson’s work might fall prey to a a foreign disinformation campaign targeting Congress.

“He is the least credible person in the entire United States government to lead such a desperate taxpayer-funded smear campaign,” Ms. Bedingfield said of Mr. Johnson, accusing him of using his committee “to further Donald Trump’s political agenda.”

Ms. Bedingfield went on to suggest that Mr. Johnson should call himself as a witness in his inquiry to discuss his own contacts with foreign officials.

Mr. Johnson’s office has not commented on the status of the probe, and an email to his spokesman was not immediately returned.

A mayor and Bronze Star-veteran jumps into the Democratic Senate primary in Louisiana.

Adrian Perkins, the mayor of Shreveport, La., and a decorated Army veteran who served in Iraq and Afghanistan, is jumping into the race to unseat one of the state’s two Republican senators.

Mr. Perkins entered the Democratic primary just ahead of Friday’s registration deadline. A Harvard-trained lawyer who served as class president at West Point and earned a Bronze Star, he was elected mayor in 2018 at the age of 33.

In a statement, Mr. Perkins said he was compelled to run by “a virus that threatens our lives, our safety and our economy,” adding that “Washington’s political games are only making us sick.”

Mr. Trump’s flagging popularity and public disapproval of his response to the pandemic are encouraging candidates like Mr. Perkins to take their chances even in states previously seen as lock wins for Republicans.

He joins a Democratic field that includes Antoine Pierce, a talk radio host from Baton Rouge, and Dartanyon Williams, who founded a software development company. The winner of the primary will compete against Senator Bill Cassidy.

Mr. Pierceresponded to Mr. Perkins’ announcement on Twitter, accusing him of jumping into the race late in order to “split the vote and hand the race to Cassidy.”

Unseating Mr. Cassidy will be a challenge for Democrats in a deep red state that delivered a 20-point margin of victory to Mr. Trump in 2016. Mr. Cassidy has raised about $6 million for his re-election effort, according to federal campaign finance records, a modest amount when compared to endangered incumbents, but much more than any of his possible Democratic challengers.

“My granddad was a sharecropper, “ Mr. Perkins said in a video posted on Twitter on Wednesday. “I’ve traveled many miles since those days, fought in two wars, but the road I’ve taken in life always led me back to the Louisiana I love.”

Twitter is cracking down on QAnon, the pro-Trump conspiracy theory.

Twitter said Tuesday evening that it had removed thousands of accounts that spread messages about the conspiracy theory QAnon, saying their messages could lead to harm and violated company policy.

The social media giant said it would also block trends related to the loose network of QAnon conspiracy theories from appearing in its trending topics and search, and would not allow users to post links affiliated with the theories on its platform.

It was the first time that a social media service had taken sweeping action to remove content affiliated with QAnon, which has become increasingly popular on Twitter, Facebook and YouTube. It has also trickled into the mainstream of the Republican Party, with numerous congressional candidates this campaign cycle expressing support for the theory.

Mr. Trump has paved their way, repeatedly retweeting QAnon supporters and cheering on candidates who openly support the movement, like Marjorie Taylor Greene, a Republican House candidate in Georgia.

Over several weeks, Twitter has removed 7,000 accounts that posted QAnon material, a company spokeswoman said. The accounts had been increasingly active, and had been involved in coordinated harassment campaigns on Twitter or tried to evade a previous suspension by setting up new accounts after an old account was deleted.

An additional 150,000 accounts will be hidden from trends and search on Twitter, the spokeswoman added. The takedowns were reported by NBC News.

Liz Cheney, a powerful House Republican, faces fierce criticism for perceived disloyalty to Trump.

Representative Liz Cheney of Wyoming, the Republicans’ third-ranking House leader and a staunch conservative, has managed a tricky balancing act in a party that prizes total loyalty to the president, repeatedly breaking with him without drawing the ire of the right.

But on Tuesday that changed.

In an extraordinary closed-door meeting of House Republicans, more than a half-dozen of Mr. Trump’s most loyal supporters took aim squarely at Ms. Cheney.

What began with a complaint from Representative Matt Gaetz of Florida about Ms. Cheney’s recent support for a primary challenger to a sitting House Republican exploded into a full-blown pile-on that included accusations that Ms. Cheney was personally hurting Republicans’ chances of retaking the House with her defense of Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the nation’s top infectious disease expert; her criticism of Mr. Trump’s policies in the Middle East; and other contrarian stances.

At least one lawmaker, Mr. Gaetz, called for her to step down as the chairwoman of the House Republican Conference, the position that has made her the highest-ranking Republican woman in Washington. And Representative Jim Jordan of Ohio flatly said that Republicans would be better served by a leader who was helping Mr. Trump instead of going after him.

Ms. Cheney punched back and departed with the apparent support of her fellow Republican leaders.

But the ugly familial showdown, which was described by four people in the room and was first reported by Politico, reflected a simmering power struggle and sour mood among Republicans. They are watching their electoral prospects sag and pondering their future in the minority, potentially without Mr. Trump in the White House — and looking for people to blame.

The Trump campaign uses a picture from a protest in Ukraine to depict ‘chaos &amp; violence’ in the U.S.

The Trump campaign used a picture from a protest in Ukraine in 2014 to depict the “chaos &amp; violence” that it claims is unfolding around the United Statesin a digital ad on Facebook this week.

The ad, which doesn’t provide a location for the photo in question, comes as the Trump campaign has been running a multimillion dollar television and digital ad campaign portraying recent, largely peaceful protests as violent.

The picture appears in the ad next to a photograph of Mr. Trump and law enforcement officers. It was posted to Wikipedia Commons, a photo sharing site, in 2014 by Mstyslav Chernov, a photographer on the ground during the protests.

The caption from the Wikipedia Commons entry reads: “A police officer attacked by protesters during clashes in Ukraine, Kyiv.”

This is not the first time the Trump campaign has used pictures from foreign conflicts in its ads. The campaign’s first television ad in 2016 featured a video of scores of people scrambling over a wall, as a narrator says “He’ll stop illegal immigration by building a wall on our southern border that Mexico will pay for.” The scene, however, is not from the southern border of the United States, butfrom Morocco, also in 2014.

The Trump campaign did not respond to requests for comment.

The campaign has spent almost $20 million over the last 20 days on ominous TV ads that dovetail with Mr. Trump’s message of “law and order,” more than Mr. Biden has spent on his total television budget in the same time frame, and a relatively large sum for this stage of the race.

Reporting was contributed by Maggie Astor, Peter Baker, Luke Broadwater, Kate Conger, Nick Corasaniti, Nicholas Fandos, Maggie Haberman, Thomas Kaplan, Annie Karni, Jennifer Medina, Katie Rogers, Stephanie Saul, Ed Shanahan and Glenn Thrush.

Reporting was contributed by Maggie Astor, Peter Baker, Luke Broadwater, Kate Conger, Nick Corasaniti, Nicholas Fandos, Maggie Haberman, Thomas Kaplan, Annie Karni, Jennifer Medina, Katie Rogers, Stephanie Saul, Ed Shanahan and Glenn Thrush.