

Many parents want protection against Covid-19 for their children, and vaccinating children would contribute to the widespread immunity that epidemiologists consider essential to stopping the pandemic. The American Academy of Pediatrics has called for expanding vaccine trials to include children. And on Tuesday, the drug company Moderna said it had begun a study that will test its vaccine in children under 12, including babies as young as six months.

The study is expected to involve 6,750 healthy children in the United States and Canada. Moderna is already testing its vaccine in 3,000 children ages 12 to 17. Pfizer-BioNTech, the maker of the other two-dose vaccine authorized in the United States, is testing its vaccine in children ages 12 to 15 and has said it plans to move to younger groups.

Moderna's announcement came as adult vaccinations continued in the United States, while most European governments have suspended use of the AstraZeneca vaccine, further weakening the sputtering rollout on the continent. No country in the European Union is on track to reach the goal of inoculating 70 percent of its population by September. Emer Cooke, the executive director of the European Medicines Agency, said regulators were still studying side effects of the AstraZeneca vaccine involving blood clots and abnormal bleeding that had been reported. But she said there was ''no indication'' that vaccination had caused them.

In the United States, Indiana and Ohio became the latest states to expand vaccine eligibility. In Indiana, where 20 percent of the population has had at least one dose and 11 percent is fully vaccinated, people 45 and older could get vaccinated, effective immediately. In Ohio, the age threshold will drop to 40 on Friday, and residents with certain medical conditions, including cancer, chronic kidney disease and heart disease, will also become eligible.

Still, the United States is adding about as many cases every day as in early October, on the way to the peaks in November, December and January. A new study suggested what some epidemiologists suspected all along: The pandemic was worse than the numbers indicated. The study, published on Tuesday in the journal JAMA, concluded that asymptomatic or undiagnosed coronavirus infections accounted for more than twice the number of reported cases, ''suggesting a more widespread pandemic.'' The study involved antibody tests of nearly 62,000 people who said they were well. But some 6.6 percent turned out to be antibody-positive. From that percentage, the authors extrapolated that there were 15.9 million cases in the United States at the end of September -- more than double the 7.26 million cases that had been reported by then.

Wider Fears From an Island's Outbreak

Papua New Guinea, which had largely avoided the coronavirus, is sounding the alarm about an outbreak, and officials in Australia are worried that it could head their way.

The small island nation has recorded 2,269 coronavirus cases and 26 deaths since the beginning of the pandemic, according to the country's health department. But nearly half of the infections were posted in the last two weeks, and 97 cases were reported on Sunday. News outlets in Australia said that the intensive care unit was full at the hospital in Port Moresby, the capital of Papua New Guinea.

On Monday, Prime Minister James Marape called the situation ''critical'' and said a ''nationwide isolation strategy'' would be announced on Wednesday. He said it would not involve a ''total lockdown.'' Businesses will remain open, but residents will not be allowed to leave their provinces or villages.

It is not clear why cases have exploded. One concern is that recent gatherings to commemorate Michael Somare, the country's first prime minister, who died last month at 84, will prove to have been superspreader events.

Some officials in Australia are worried that the outbreak is too close. On Monday Annastacia Palaszczuk, the premier of the Australian state of Queensland, called for Australia to vaccinate Papua New Guineans, a move that aid groups and Australia's opposition party have also urged. Ms. Palaszczuk said that Queensland Health had collected nasal swabs from 500 Papua New Guinea residents for P.C.R., or polymerase chain reaction, tests and that 250 had been positive. ''So, one in two people,'' The Sydney Morning Herald quoted her as saying. ''That's quite extraordinary, and quite concerning when it's right on our doorstep.'' The nearest of the Torres Strait Islands, a cluster north of Australia's Cape York peninsula, is just two and a half miles from Papua New Guinea.

Papua New Guinea has ordered 200,000 doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine from Australia and 70,000 from India, but the first shipments are not expected until at least next month. Mr. Marape, the prime minister, said he had asked if Australia could send some vaccines sooner to inoculate health care workers.

China Fights Reference to Virus's Origin

A German children's book on the coronavirus was removed from bookstores after Chinese diplomats complained to the publisher about a passage on the origin of the virus.

In ''A Corona Rainbow for Anna and Moritz'' -- written to explain the pandemic, lockdown measures and hygiene rules to young readers -- Moritz, an elementary-school boy, declared, ''The virus comes from China and has spread from there around the world.''

That prompted a complaint from the Chinese consulate in Hamburg, according to a semiofficial Chinese news blog, German-China, which called the idea that the coronavirus originated in China ''a malicious claim.'' The Chinese government, apparently anxious about damage to the country's reputation brought on by the pandemic, has promoted questionable possibilities while highlighting how well China has handled its own outbreaks.

Carlsen, the Hamburg-based publisher of ''A Corona Rainbow,'' said that it was written last spring and that if it were being written now, the information would be conveyed differently. ''Today we would not use this formulation, which has proved to have a far more ambiguous meaning than we intended,'' Katrin Hogrebe, a spokeswoman for Carlsen, said in a statement. The sentence in question does not appear in a new edition of the book.Coronavirus Update wraps up the day's developments with information from across the virus report.





