Health officials testified to Congress about the government’s pandemic response.  Swimming will be allowed at New York City beaches starting on July 1.

This briefing has ended. Read the latest updates here.

Across political lines, governors implement new rules and urge residents to stay home.

As California and Texas, the two most populous states in America, were inundated by a record number of infections, their governors on Tuesday pleaded with the public for greater  vigilance and signaled a retrenchment on some reopening plans.

In Texas, Gov. Greg Abbott urged residents to stay home and said that many people in the state had not grasped the magnitude of the deadly outbreak, as it reported another daily record with more than 5,000 new infections.

In California, where Yosemite National Park on Tuesday canceled campsite reservations less than two weeks after reopening, Gov. Gavin Newsom moved closer to gaining the authority to withhold funding from counties that did not follow state orders aimed at preventing the spread of the virus.

And in Washington State, which has seen a slight rebound of the virus, Gov. Jay Inslee announced that he would order everyone to wear a mask in all outdoor and indoor public spaces when six-foot social distancing is not possible.

The renewed alarm of the governors cut across political lines, and the rise in infections occurred despite considerably different initial approaches to the outbreak.

Mr. Abbott, a Republican, had imposed one of the nation’s shortest stay-at-home orders, while Mr. Inslee and Mr. Newsom, both Democrats, embraced more rigid restrictions in their states. California and Washington, which yielded the first report of an infection in the United States, felt confident enough about their caseloads in mid-April to transfer hundreds of potentially life-saving ventilators to New York and other besieged states in the East.

More than half of the states have seen an increase in cases weeks after parts of the country reopened, and some state officials are slowing return-to-work plans and reimposing earlier restrictions.

In Louisiana, occupancy limits will remain in place. And in Riley County, Kan., where case numbers grew more than 50 percent over the past week, officials said they would tighten restrictions on mass gatherings.

“I think we may have let our guard down a little bit,” said Julie Gibbs, the Riley County health officer. A majority of new cases have appeared in young adults.

In Yakima, Wash., an over-capacity hospital has forced the transfer of patients by ambulance to other facilities around the state. In response to that growing caseload, Mr. Inslee implemented stronger restrictions on the county, saying that businesses there cannot operate unless they ensure customers cover their faces.

Louisiana logged 1,356 new cases on Tuesday, the largest amount since late March and early April. The spike came one day after Gov. John Bel Edwards, a Democrat, said it was not yet safe for businesses to reopen more fully.

In Texas, Mr. Abbott renewed his warnings in an interview with the television station KBTX.

“Because the spread is so rampant right now, there is never a reason for you to have to leave your home unless you do need to go out,” he said. “The safest place for you is at your home.”

The state’s cases and hospitalizations have doubled over the past month. Local leaders have expressed fears that the pandemic may be close to overloading hospital capacity after hospitalizations jumped from an average of 1,600 a day to 3,200 a day.

“There remain a lot of people in the state of Texas who think the spread of Covid-19 is really not a challenge,” said Mr. Abbott, who has resisted the idea of another lockdown.

Fauci warns of a ‘disturbing’ uptick of infections in some states and contradicts Trump on testing.

Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the nation’s top infectious disease expert, told House lawmakers that the nation is experiencing a “disturbing surge” of coronavirus infections as states reopen too quickly and without adequate plans for testing and tracing the contacts of those infected.

In a break with President Trump’s relentlessly positive assessments of the pandemic’s trajectory in the United States, Dr. Fauci told the house Energy and Commerce Committee that the picture is a “mixed bag,” with some bright spots but many dark clouds and unknowns. Some states like New York are “doing very well” in controlling the spread of the virus, he said, but called the surge in other states “very troublesome to me.”

“The next couple of weeks are going to be critical in our ability to address those surges we are seeing in Florida, Texas, Arizona, and other states,” Dr. Fauci told the panel as he and other leaders of the White House coronavirus task force appeared together for the first time in more than a month to brief Congress.

While deaths from the virus have been dropping over the past few days, he added, it is too soon to tell whether the numbers mean anything, saying that “deaths always lag considerably behind cases,” and that the trend may reverse itself. The hearing comes as the United States accounted for 20 percent of all the new cases worldwide on Sunday, according to New York Times data.

In their testimony, the officials said they had made progress in confronting the virus, including toward a vaccine that Dr. Fauci said he was “cautiously optimistic” could be ready by early next year and expanding the availability of testing in doctor’s offices by late fall. But they also made clear they did not agree with Mr. Trump, who last week claimed in an interview with Fox News that the virus would simply “fade away.”

Dr. Robert R. Redfield, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, called the pandemic “the greatest public health crisis our nation and world have confronted in a century,” and warned that the outbreak would coincide with flu season later this year, straining hospitals and health workers. Getting a flu shot, he said, would be even more important this year.

“This single act will save lives,” he said.

The doctors were also grilled on Mr. Trump’s claim at a campaign rally on Saturday in Tulsa, Okla., that he had asked “my people” to “slow the testing down” because increased screening was revealing more infections, making the country look bad.

Dr. Fauci contradicted the president, saying that neither he nor any other officials he knew of had been asked by the president to slow testing, and that they planned to do the opposite.

“In fact, we will be doing more testing,” Dr. Fauci said, adding that more surveillance of new cases would help “understand exactly what is going on in community spread.”

Later in the hearing, Adm. Brett P. Giroir, once the administration’s testing “czar,” backed up Dr. Fauci, saying that he had not been instructed to slow testing.

“We are proceeding in just the opposite — we want to do more testing and of higher quality,” he said.

Dr. Redfield said expanded testing was particularly important because of the asymptomatic nature of many coronavirus infections.

Shortly before the hearing began, Mr. Trump took to Twitter to complain that he was not getting credit for his response to the virus, noting that Dr. Fauci, “who is with us in all ways,” has “a very high 72% Approval rating.” The approval rating for the president, who is known to track his own popularity closely, is 41 percent, according to the latest figures by the polling analysis website FiveThirtyEight.

New York City agrees to open beaches for swimming on July 1.

New Yorkers will soon be able to seek relief from the summer heat in the waters of the city’s public beaches.

Starting July 1, the city’s 14 miles of beaches will open for swimming and be staffed with lifeguards, a spokeswoman for Mayor Bill de Blasio confirmed on Tuesday night. The city’s dozens of public pools, however, will remain closed.

The decision about the beaches came as New York City entered the second part of the state’s four-phase reopening plan. This phase permits outdoor dining and some in-store shopping, and also allows hair salons, barbershops and real estate firms to reopen.

Typically, the city’s beaches open on Memorial Day weekend, at the end of May. Most other beaches in the New York region have been open for weeks, though many of them have limited access in an effort to slow the spread of the coronavirus.

Mr. de Blasio’s decision, first reported by The Wall Street Journal, came as the City Council was threatening to force his hand. On Tuesday, Politico reported that Mark Levine, a councilman from Manhattan, was planning to introduce legislation that would have required the mayor to allow swimming at the beaches.

Henry Garrido, executive director of the lifeguards’ union, said the city pools were used to train and certify about 500 lifeguards this spring.

The current ban on swimming has not prevented all New Yorkers from going into the water. In Queens, where the beaches have been packed on weekends, people have routinely violated the rules and frolicked in the waves off Rockaway Beach.

Fauci and Redfield said they weren’t consulted on withdrawing from the W.H.O., and still work with it ‘day by day.’

Two of the nation’s top health officials expressed concern on Tuesday about Mr. Trump’s decision late last month to withdraw from the World Health Organization, but said that they had maintained longstanding relationships with the W.H.O. even as the White House moved to punish the agency over its relationship with China.

In their congressional testimony, Dr. Fauci and Dr. Redfield said that they were not consulted on the withdrawal, but that they remained in close touch with the organization.

“Despite any policy issues that come from higher up in the White House, we at the operational level continue to interact with the W.H.O. in a very meaningful way, literally on a day by day basis,” Dr. Fauci said, adding that he was still on a weekly call with the organization that puts him in touch with international medical officials.

Mr. Trump’s move to withdraw was one part of a broad effort to retaliate against China and assign blame over the origins of the virus. Like some Republican lawmakers, he has portrayed the W.H.O. as a puppet of the Chinese Communist Party.

Dr. Redfield said that Mr. Trump’s decision has potential financial consequences for the W.H.O., but  that the C.D.C. has been able to circumvent those.

“We have the ability to provide funding to the operation through different mechanisms, so we can continue the public health work that we need to get done,” he said.

The European Union may bar U.S. travelers as it reopens borders, citing virus failures.

European countries rushing to revive their economies and reopen borders after months of restrictions are prepared to block Americans from entering because the United States has failed to control the pandemic, according to draft lists of acceptable travelers seen by The New York Times.

That prospect, which would lump U.S. visitors in with Russians and Brazilians as unwelcome, is a stinging blow to American prestige and a tacit repudiation of President Trump’s handling of the virus. The United States has more than 2.3 million cases and upward of 120,000 deaths, more than any other country.

Matina Stevis-Gridneff, our Brussels correspondent, reports that members of the European Union are still haggling over two potential lists of acceptable visitors based on how countries are faring with the virus. But both include China and developing nations like Uganda, Cuba and Vietnam — and neither includes the United States.

Travelers from the United States and the rest of the world have been excluded from visiting the European Union — with few exceptions, mostly for repatriations or “essential travel” — since mid-March. A final decision on reopening the borders is expected early next week.

A ban on American visitors reflects the shifting pattern of the pandemic.

In March, when Europe was the epicenter, Mr. Trump infuriated European leaders by banning citizens from most E.U. countries from traveling to the United States. He said the move was necessary to protect Americans.

In late May and early June, Mr. Trump said Europe was “making progress” and hinted that some restrictions would be lifted soon. But nothing has happened.

Today, Europe has largely curbed the outbreak, even as the United States has seen infections surge in just the past week.

Saudi Arabia limits the hajj pilgrimage to 1,000 people.

Saudi Arabia announced Tuesday that only about 1,000 people would be allowed to perform the annual hajj pilgrimage at the end of July, signaling the effective cancellation of one of the world’s largest gatherings of Muslims.

Saudi officials already said Monday that,  as a measure to prevent the spread of the virus, the hajj would be limited to Muslim residents of Saudi Arabia, who last year accounted for over one-quarter of the 2.5 million people who performed the pilgrimage.

But the updated restrictions announced Monday — allowing a tiny fraction of the usual crowd — amounted to a declaration that this year’s hajj would be a token showing.

“This is a very precise process,” the Hajj Minister, Mohammad Benten, told reporters. “We are working with health ministry experts and organizers to guarantee safe pilgrimage.”

Saudi Arabia has had one of the largest virus outbreaks in the Middle East, with 161,000 cases and 1,346 deaths. Although the rate of infections has risen in recent days, the authorities lifted a nationwide curfew to allow economic activity to resume, but they retained a ban on international travel.

Pilgrims permitted to perform the hajj this year will have to be younger than  65  and in good health, said the health minister, Tawfiq Al-Rabiah. They will be required to undergo a virus test in advance and to self-quarantine after they return home.

The announcement sent a wave of sadness across Muslim communities. “I am heartbroken, sad and disappointed but what can one do?” said Qari Ali Gul, who runs a seminary in Peshawar, Pakistan. “This must be the will of God.”

Latin America has already been hit hard. But the worst may still be ahead.

The virus was always going to hit Latin America hard. Experts warned that the region’s combustible blend of inequality, densely packed cities, legions of informal workers living day to day, and health care systems starved of resources could undermine even the best attempts to curb the pandemic.

But by brushing off the dangers, fumbling the response, dismissing scientific or expert guidance, withholding data and simply denying the extent of the outbreak altogether, some governments have made matters worse, and Latin America has quickly become a focal point.

Unlike in parts of Asia, Europe and the hardest-hit U.S. cities, the virus is  gaining steam across the region. Deaths have more than doubled across Latin America in a month, according to the Pan American Health Organization, and the region now accounts for several of the world’s worst outbreaks.

And as the virus storms through the region, corruption has flourished, the already intense political polarization in some countries has deepened, and some governments have curtailed civil rights. Economies already stretched thin before the virus lie on the precipice of ruin.

Not all is dire in the region. Nations like Uruguay and Costa Rica seem to have avoided the worst so far, while an almost military-style health care intervention in Cuba has left the island nation in better standing than most.

In other news from around the world:

•In Germany, the governor of the state of North Rhein-Westphalia announced on Tuesday a temporary lockdown of Gütersloh, the district that includes a pork processing plant which has registered 1,550 new infections since last week. Later in the day, the state’s health minister declared that a neighboring district to the west, Warendorf, would also go back into lockdown.•A French drugmaker plans to accelerate clinical trials of a coronavirus vaccine in the hope of earning approval for it by the first half of next year. The drugmaker, Sanofi, announced the plan on Tuesday. The company and its partner, GlaxoSmithKline, had originally projected that a vaccine would be available — at the earliest — in the latter half of the year.•Peruvian health authorities reported more than 3,000 new cases on Tuesday, pushing the country past 260,000 total. Peru has one of the world’s worst outbreaks, as deep-rooted inequality and grafthave thwarted the early steps its took to prepare for the pandemic.

In Germany, the governor of the state of North Rhein-Westphalia announced on Tuesday a temporary lockdown of Gütersloh, the district that includes a pork processing plant which has registered 1,550 new infections since last week. Later in the day, the state’s health minister declared that a neighboring district to the west, Warendorf, would also go back into lockdown.

A French drugmaker plans to accelerate clinical trials of a coronavirus vaccine in the hope of earning approval for it by the first half of next year. The drugmaker, Sanofi, announced the plan on Tuesday. The company and its partner, GlaxoSmithKline, had originally projected that a vaccine would be available — at the earliest — in the latter half of the year.

Peruvian health authorities reported more than 3,000 new cases on Tuesday, pushing the country past 260,000 total. Peru has one of the world’s worst outbreaks, as deep-rooted inequality and grafthave thwarted the early steps its took to prepare for the pandemic.

•Novak Djokovic, the world’s top-ranked male tennis player, said on Tuesday that he had tested positive, after days of growing criticism about an exhibition tournament he organized where other players were also found to be infected.•Singapore’s prime minister announced that the city-state would hold the first elections in Southeast Asia since the pandemic began.

Novak Djokovic, the world’s top-ranked male tennis player, said on Tuesday that he had tested positive, after days of growing criticism about an exhibition tournament he organized where other players were also found to be infected.

Singapore’s prime minister announced that the city-state would hold the first elections in Southeast Asia since the pandemic began.

Trump speaks to a mostly mask-free crowd in Phoenix.

President Trump on Tuesday spoke in front of an almost completely maskless crowd of students who gathered to hear him inside a megachurch in Phoenix.

The sight of mask-free spectators at a high-profiling gathering was reminiscent of the president’s Saturday night rally in Tulsa, Okla. — except this time, the crowd violated a city requirement. Phoenix residents must wear masks in public spaces as Arizona battles a spikein coronavirus cases.

The mayor of Phoenix, Kate Gallego, issued a statement ahead of Mr. Trump’s event urging him and other elected officials speaking there to set an example and wear  masks. Mr. Trump, however, has refused to appear in public with a mask. The one time he has been photographed in a mask was during a private portion of a tour of a Ford factory in Michigan that was producing ventilators.

Pictures of the Turning Point Action Convention inside the Dream City Church showed many red “MAGA” hats and uncovered faces.

In a recent interview with The Wall Street Journal, Mr. Trump suggested that individuals were wearing masks not as a safety precaution, but as a political statement against him.

Many attendees at the Tulsa rally discarded masks that were distributed as they entered the indoor BOK Center.

In Arizona,  some public health experts had warned that Tuesday’s gathering carried extreme risk for the general public.

The state has been struggling with a sharp rise in cases since Gov. Doug Ducey moved in May to lift stay-at-home orders.

On Tuesday, the Arizona Department of Health Services said the state had 3,591 new cases, eclipsing the record set Friday when 3,246 new cases were reported. There were also 42 deaths, raising the state’s toll to 1,384. And the state reported records for the number of virus patients hospitalized,  in intensive care and on ventilators.

The handling of the pandemic by Governor Ducey, a Republican, has come under intense criticism from Democratic leaders in the state’s largest cities. Until last week, he resisted allowing mayors to make wearing  masks mandatory in their cities.

A judge in Brazil has admonished President Bolsonaro for failing to wear a mask.

A federal judge in Brazil admonished President Jair Bolsonaro for failing to wear a mask in public spaces in the capital, a rare rebuke for a leader who has repeatedly dismissed the danger posed by the coronavirus even as his country became a major hot spot.

Although officials in the capital, Brasília, have ordered residents to wear masks whenever they are outdoors, Mr. Bolsonaro has often been seen venturing outside with his face uncovered. Sometimes he shakes hands and encourages crowds.

Now it may cost him. At least, financially.

In an order issued late Monday, Judge Renato Coelho Borelli warned the president that he was subject to a $400 fine for appearing in public without a mask.

The order came as Brazil’s virus caseload passed a million over the weekend. More than 50,000 people have died, and in recent days health officials have often reported more than 1,000 deaths a day.

Those figures put Brazil behind only the United States.

In his order, the judge wrote that a “simple Google search” yields several photos of Mr. Bolsonaro walking around Brasília without a mask, “exposing other people to a disease that has caused national consternation.”

Several top aides of the president were found to have the virus in March after a presidential delegation returned from a trip to Florida, where Mr. Bolsonaro dined with President Trump.

The order was issued in response to a lawsuit filed by a Brazilian attorney, Victor Mendonça Neiva, who turned to the courts to call attention to the president’s cavalier handling of the health crisis.

Earlier this month, many weeks after it had become mandatory to wear a mask in Brasília, Mr. Bolsonaro stopped at a police checkpoint to shake people’s hands, hug children and take pictures with supporters. He wasn’t wearing a mask.

Britain’s prime minister will lift a wide variety of restrictions.

Three months after reluctantly and belatedly imposing a lockdown on England, Prime Minister Boris Johnson of Britain announced on Tuesday that he would lift many restrictions — most significantly, cutting the required social distance between people in half, to one meter, or about three feet.

Declaring that “our long national hibernation is beginning to come to an end,” Mr. Johnson cleared the way for the reopening of pubs, restaurants, hotels and museums in England on July 4, which will bring the country closer in line with Germany, Italy and other European countries.

But scientists, including some who advise the government, warned that reducing the required social distance would substantially raise the risk of spreading the virus in a country that is still reporting nearly 1,000 new infections a day.

Mr. Johnson is yielding to intense pressure, even from members of his own Conservative Party, to restart the British economy and return society to a semblance of normalcy. The government’s scientific advisers signed off on the change, though not without reservations and anguished debate.

In a study released this month, the government’s scientific advisory group, known as SAGE, estimated that reducing the so-called two-meter rule to one meter could increase the rate of transmission anywhere from two to 10 times.

Those risks would be mitigated, it said, if people wore face coverings and avoided prolonged face-to-face contact. Transmission is far less likely outdoors, which is why pubs and restaurants will be required to install plastic screens, provide adequate ventilation and collect contact information from customers. Face coverings are already mandatory on public transportation.

Mnuchin says another stimulus package could pass by the end of July and the tax filing deadline could again be extended.

Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said on Tuesday that he could foresee another economic stimulus package passing in Congress by the end of July and that he was considering extending the tax filing deadline beyond the current date, July 15.

Speaking at an investing conference sponsored by Bloomberg, Mr. Mnuchin said that he would like to see the next stimulus legislation be more targeted toward individuals and businesses that have been hit hardest by the pandemic. He also downplayed the likelihood of  including a major infrastructure investment in such a bill, noting that building roads and bridges would not necessarily help displaced workers get rehired quickly.

The comments came after Mr. Mnuchin told Senate Republicans on Tuesday that he agreed with the conference’s plans to wait until late July to address another relief package, as well as another round of stimulus checks to American taxpayers.

Mr. Mnuchin also contradicted earlier remarks made by Peter Navarro, a top White House economics adviser, that the Trump administration was willing to consider a $2 trillion package. He told senators that those comments were not representative of the administration’s position, according to two people familiar with the discussion, but unauthorized to disclose it publicly.

In other news from around the United States:

•A former director of the C.D.C., Dr. Julie Gerberding, warned a Senate committee Tuesday that the pandemic is “a harbinger of things to come,” and said there is no guarantee that a single vaccine will protect everyone from infection.•In Florida, the Department of Health reported nearly 3,300 new cases on Tuesday, pushing the state’s total to 103,503. Since the state began reopeningin May, cases have dramatically increased. On Tuesday, Gov. Ron DeSantis, a Republican, said bars and restaurants will be able to continue to operate, but those that fail to limit capacity to 50 percent or follow other guidelines will “get a visit from the grim reaper in terms of business licenses.”•Michigan’s governor asked an appeals court on Tuesday to put a hold on a federal judge’s order that will allow indoor gyms to open throughout the state. The  judge agreed last week with the plaintiffs that the state did not provide sufficient justification for keeping gyms closed in all but the least populated parts of the state. The governor’s motion asks that the ruling not be put into effect until an appeal by the state is decided.•Gov. Ned Lamont of Connecticut and Gov. Philip D. Murphy of New Jersey have joined Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York this week in publicly saying they are considering possible measures against travelers from  states that are seeing large increases in cases. In March, Floridaimposed a quarantine on people arriving from the New York region. “That’s something we’re seriously considering, that if you come in from a state that has a high transmission rate, you would have to self-quarantine or we would have to test you,”Mr. Cuomo said Tuesday on MSNBC, responding to a question about what New York might do.•In Illinois, Gov. J.B. Pritzker announced Tuesday that in-person classes will resume at K-12 schools, community colleges and universities in the fall. Among other requirements that accompany this reopening, elementary schools must conduct temperature checks, and teachers and students must wear masks. Mr. Pritzker said  K-12 districts would be provided with 2.5 million cloth face coverings.•In New Jersey, amusement parks, water parks and playgrounds will reopen on July 2, the governor said Tuesday. Amusement parks and water parks must operate at 50 percent capacity, masks have to be worn when social distancing is not possible, and people must stay six feet apart in lines. The state reported 57 additional virus-related deaths. In New York State, there were 27 additional deaths, the governor said Tuesday.•Citing the pandemic’s spread in federal prisons, Roger J. Stone Jr., Mr. Trump’s longtime friend and adviser, asked a  judge for a two-month delay before he is forced to begin a 40-month sentence. Mr. Stone’s sentence is set to begin next week after his conviction on seven felonies committed in a bid to thwart a congressional inquiry that threatened Mr. Trump. Mr. Stone said that prosecutors had indicated they did not oppose the request.•The University of Michigan said Tuesday it would withdraw from hosting a presidential debate on Oct. 15, citing concerns about bringing large numbers of national and international media and campaign officials to the campus in Ann Arbor amid the pandemic.

A former director of the C.D.C., Dr. Julie Gerberding, warned a Senate committee Tuesday that the pandemic is “a harbinger of things to come,” and said there is no guarantee that a single vaccine will protect everyone from infection.

In Florida, the Department of Health reported nearly 3,300 new cases on Tuesday, pushing the state’s total to 103,503. Since the state began reopeningin May, cases have dramatically increased. On Tuesday, Gov. Ron DeSantis, a Republican, said bars and restaurants will be able to continue to operate, but those that fail to limit capacity to 50 percent or follow other guidelines will “get a visit from the grim reaper in terms of business licenses.”

Michigan’s governor asked an appeals court on Tuesday to put a hold on a federal judge’s order that will allow indoor gyms to open throughout the state. The  judge agreed last week with the plaintiffs that the state did not provide sufficient justification for keeping gyms closed in all but the least populated parts of the state. The governor’s motion asks that the ruling not be put into effect until an appeal by the state is decided.

Gov. Ned Lamont of Connecticut and Gov. Philip D. Murphy of New Jersey have joined Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York this week in publicly saying they are considering possible measures against travelers from  states that are seeing large increases in cases. In March, Floridaimposed a quarantine on people arriving from the New York region. “That’s something we’re seriously considering, that if you come in from a state that has a high transmission rate, you would have to self-quarantine or we would have to test you,”Mr. Cuomo said Tuesday on MSNBC, responding to a question about what New York might do.

In Illinois, Gov. J.B. Pritzker announced Tuesday that in-person classes will resume at K-12 schools, community colleges and universities in the fall. Among other requirements that accompany this reopening, elementary schools must conduct temperature checks, and teachers and students must wear masks. Mr. Pritzker said  K-12 districts would be provided with 2.5 million cloth face coverings.

In New Jersey, amusement parks, water parks and playgrounds will reopen on July 2, the governor said Tuesday. Amusement parks and water parks must operate at 50 percent capacity, masks have to be worn when social distancing is not possible, and people must stay six feet apart in lines. The state reported 57 additional virus-related deaths. In New York State, there were 27 additional deaths, the governor said Tuesday.

Citing the pandemic’s spread in federal prisons, Roger J. Stone Jr., Mr. Trump’s longtime friend and adviser, asked a  judge for a two-month delay before he is forced to begin a 40-month sentence. Mr. Stone’s sentence is set to begin next week after his conviction on seven felonies committed in a bid to thwart a congressional inquiry that threatened Mr. Trump. Mr. Stone said that prosecutors had indicated they did not oppose the request.

The University of Michigan said Tuesday it would withdraw from hosting a presidential debate on Oct. 15, citing concerns about bringing large numbers of national and international media and campaign officials to the campus in Ann Arbor amid the pandemic.

Reporting was contributed by Azam Ahmed, Manuela Andreoni, Jes Aznar, Hannah Beech, Aurelien Breeden, Stephen Castle, Kenneth Chang, Julie Creswell, Maria Cramer, Reid J. Epstein, Thomas Erdbrink, Luis Ferré-Sadurní, Matthew Haag, Ben Hubbard, Mike Ives, Miriam Jordan, Annie Karni, Ismail Khan, Natalie Kitroeff, Tyler Kepner, Anatoly Kurmanaev, Sharon LaFraniere, Mark Landler, Ernesto Londoño, Alex Marshall, Jonathan Martin, Patricia Mazzei, Jennifer Medina, Sarah Mervosh, David Montgomery, Heather Murphy, Elian Peltier, Daniel Politi, Alan Rappeport, Simon Romero, Dana Rubinstein, Dagny Salas, Christopher F. Schuetze, Michael D. Shear, Natasha Singer, Mitch Smith, Matt Stevens, Matina Stevis-Gridneff, Sheryl Gay Stolberg, Eileen Sullivan, Lucy Tompkins, Hisako Ueno, Neil Vigdor, Declan Walsh, Noah Weiland, Katherine J. Wu and Elaine Yu.

PHOTO: Barton Creek in Austin, Tex., last week. The governor has since urged residents to stay home as infections have spiked. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Ilana Panich-Linsman for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)