

Something different slowed vaccinations on Monday -- not shortages of vaccines at hospitals or clinics, not hiccups on drugmakers' production lines, not undersupplies of necessary syringes, but a wind-whipped snowstorm that blustered its way across the Northeast.

Vaccination appointments were postponed up and down the East Coast. Mayor Bill de Blasio of New York -- who announced the cancellation of Monday's appointments on Sunday, even before the storm arrived -- said on Monday that Tuesday's appointments would also be postponed because travel would still be treacherous. The storm also complicated vaccination efforts from Washington, D.C., to Boston, where the vaccine site at Fenway Park opened an hour early on Monday, and people with afternoon appointments were told to show up in the morning.

Andy Slavitt, a senior adviser to President Biden's Covid response team, acknowledged the frustration over scheduling appointments. Vaccinations had been picking up in the last couple of weeks, though slowly, as the administration pushed to accelerate inoculations and limit the spread of new and more contagious virus variants. ''If we didn't have these variants looming,'' the nation would be in a relatively good place, said Dr. Peter Hotez, a vaccine scientist and pediatrician at Baylor College of Medicine in Houston. But if those variants take over by spring -- ''as many of us are predicting,'' he said -- the picture would become darker again. ''We really have to vaccinate the American population by late spring, early summer.''

So far, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said on Monday, more than 32.2 million doses had been administered -- which Mr. Slavitt said amounted to 1 in 10 Americans -- out of 49.9 million vaccines distributed.

The administration is also moving to provide home tests for the virus. Mr. Slavitt said the administration had arranged a $231 million deal with the Australian company Ellume to provide nonprescription coronavirus tests that can send results to smartphones.

He said the Ellume test was self-administered with a nasal swab that the user put in a digital device that delivered the result to the user's smartphone in less than 15 minutes. The cost of the test, at around $30 each, would be high for people who wanted to give (or take) tests frequently. But Mr. Slavitt said he expected the cost would come down as production increased.

The Food and Drug Administration gave emergency authorization to the test in December. The Ellume test detected 95 percent of the coronavirus infections found by polymerase chain reaction tests -- the benchmark laboratory assays, known as P.C.R. tests -- in a small clinical study. It was right on 97 percent of those who had received negative laboratory test results. But it did best with people who had already shown some symptoms of the coronavirus. In those who were asymptomatic, it detected only 91 percent of the infections found by P.C.R. tests.

XXX

As deadly January gave way to February, there were fewer new cases in the United States. The seven-day average of new cases peaked on Jan. 8 and dropped 40 percent through Jan. 29. In percentage terms, Colorado, Iowa, Michigan, Minnesota and Wisconsin were all down more than 65 percent, while several sparsely populated states recorded even greater declines, among them Montana, North Dakota and South Dakota.

But in the two weeks before Jan. 8, nearly 1 percent of the U.S. population had tested positive. That high starting point meant that Covid-19 hospitalizations have only fallen back to the levels of early December, when intensive-care units around the country were already straining. Hospitalizations remain almost twice as high as during the peaks in the spring and summer.

XXX

Fifteen World Health Organization experts are in China looking for clues about the virus in Wuhan, where it originated. The scientists have visited a live animal market, a hospital and a disease control center in Wuhan, which became synonymous with the dread and devastation that the virus caused in its early stages. Wuhan has rebounded, and China has attempted to exploit the W.H.O. investigation, saying that the government is showing transparency by allowing the experts into the country. The authorities have controlled the scientists' time and travels, forcing them to spend two weeks in quarantine and taking them to a government-run museum that pays tribute to China's handling of the outbreak.

It could be months or years before the team uncovers answers about how the coronavirus spread to humans, but the scientists say they are picking up important details. ''We've decided to stay away from theories, because there are so many theories,'' said Marion Koopmans, a Dutch virologist on the team. ''We are trying to look at the data and to build a list of what are possible sources.''

While the scientists explore the virus's origins, the Chinese police are looking for something else: fake vaccines. The problem came to light when the state-run news agency Xinhua reported that the police had broken up a counterfeiting ring that filled vials with saltwater and sold them as vaccines. Xinhua said that more than 80 people had been arrested in Beijing and in the provinces of Jiangsu and Shandong.

Xinhua said the police were urging members of the public to get vaccinated ''through the regular channels to avoid being deceived.'' Scalpers charged as much as $1,500 for an appointment. But the government also wants to avoid the possible political fallout from another vaccine scandal. In recent years, confidence in Chinese-made vaccines has been shaken by reports of data that was fabricated or children who became sick after they were vaccinated, even though the drugs were proved safe.

The European police agency Europol sounded the alarm about a different kind of counterfeiting. It said that fake coronavirus test certificates have proliferated, sold by crime gangs preying on travelers desperate to sidestep pandemic restrictions that require documents confirming negative tests. Europol said that a forgery ring had been selling forged negative test results to passengers at Charles de Gaulle Airport in Paris, charging as much as 300 euros (about $362).Coronavirus Update wraps up the day's developments with information from across the virus report.





