Here’s what you need to know.

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)

Good morning.

We’re covering a spree of Islamophobic attacks in India, new rules for commuters in Singapore and Malacca’s struggle to hold on to its harmonious multicultural past.

Anti-Muslim attacks in India are on the rise

Young Muslim men who were passing out food to the poor were assaulted with cricket bats. Other Muslims have been beaten up, nearly lynched, run out of their neighborhoods or attacked in mosques, branded as virus spreaders.

In Punjab State, loudspeakers at Sikh temples broadcast messages telling people not to buy milk from Muslim dairy farmers because it was said to be infected with the coronavirus.

A spree of anti-Muslim attacks has broken out across India after the country’s health ministry repeatedly blamed an Islamic seminary in the Nizamuddin area of Dehli for spreading the coronavirus and officials spoke of “human bombs” and “corona jihad.” The country was preparing to extend its lockdown another two weeks.

In a pandemic, there is always the hunt for blame. Now, in a country where hatred and sectarian violence were already on the rise, Muslims are increasingly worried for their safety.

Quotable: “Fear is staring at us, from everywhere,” said Mohammed Haider, who runs a milk stall.

Global cases have surpassed 1.7 million, and more than 112,500 people have died. The single largest and most lethal outbreak is in the U.S., with more than 540,000 cases and more than 21,000 deaths. Here are the latest updates and maps of where the virus has spread.

In other developments:

•Prime Minister Boris Johnson of Britain was discharged from a London hospital after spending nearly a week there for coronavirus treatment. He said the National Health Service “saved my life, no question.”•Egyptian police officers fired tear gas and arrested 23 people in a village where residents tried to prevent the burial of a doctor who had died from Covid-19, fearing her body would spread the virus.•Six people in Frankfurt are being investigated after a group attacked police officers with stones and metal pipes as they moved in to break up a party of about 20 people in the city late Friday.•Commuters in Singapore will soon be required to wear masks while on public transit, the city-state’s transportation minister announced.•Russia reported its largest daily increase since the start of the outbreak: 2,186 new coronavirus cases, bringing the national tally of confirmed cases to 15,770.•Saudi Arabia, Russia and other oil-producing nations completed an agreement to slash production, aiming to bolster prices that collapsed when global demand cratered amid the pandemic.

Prime Minister Boris Johnson of Britain was discharged from a London hospital after spending nearly a week there for coronavirus treatment. He said the National Health Service “saved my life, no question.”

Egyptian police officers fired tear gas and arrested 23 people in a village where residents tried to prevent the burial of a doctor who had died from Covid-19, fearing her body would spread the virus.

Six people in Frankfurt are being investigated after a group attacked police officers with stones and metal pipes as they moved in to break up a party of about 20 people in the city late Friday.

Commuters in Singapore will soon be required to wear masks while on public transit, the city-state’s transportation minister announced.

Russia reported its largest daily increase since the start of the outbreak: 2,186 new coronavirus cases, bringing the national tally of confirmed cases to 15,770.

Saudi Arabia, Russia and other oil-producing nations completed an agreement to slash production, aiming to bolster prices that collapsed when global demand cratered amid the pandemic.

The Times is providing free access to much of our coronavirus coverage, and our Coronavirus Briefing newsletter — like all of our newsletters — is free. Please consider supporting our journalism with a subscription.

As China’s imported cases rise, so does xenophobia

China’s health ministry on Sunday reported a jump in new coronavirus infections, most of which were detected in people returning from other countries.

The country recorded 162 new cases for Saturday, including 63 cases of people who have no symptoms. More than 100 of the new cases were imported — something Beijing has focused on as a threat to its containment efforts since it got domestic cases under control.

International flights are still drastically limited and nearly all foreigners barred from entering. But the country is also seeing growing displays of xenophobia.

African officials, citing “inhuman treatment being meted out” to their citizens abroad, are calling for Beijing to take action.

Details: African traders and students say they have faced racial widespread discrimination, including being evicted from apartments and forced to sleep on the streets, after five Nigerians who frequented a Guangzhou restaurant tested positive for the coronavirus.

Guangzhou authorities are said to have targeted Africans for mandatory testing and quarantine, regardless of travel history.

If you have five minutes, this is worth it

A major port whose fate was to fade away

Malacca, the old Portuguese settlement in present-day Malaysia, once linked East and West as a fulcrum of the world. But today, it’s fracturing along ethnic fault lines.

As the world pulls up its drawbridges during a time of pandemic and questions the merits of globalization, our Southeast Asia bureau chief writes, Malacca is a reminder that transoceanic exchange has a long history of bringing both promise and peril.

Here’s what else is happening

Chernobyl fires: A larger-than-typical fire in the so-called Zone of Alienation around the abandoned Chernobyl plant is stirring up radiation, though levels remain normal in Kyiv, the Ukrainian capital.

Snapshot: Above, a tulip field in Lisse, in the Netherlands. The beloved tulip season that brings hordes of visitors to the Netherlands, pulls in $7 billion euros and has inspired renowned art is bleak this year, as growers facing little demand are forced to destroy hundreds of millions of the flowers.

What we’re reading: This Guernica magazine essay about a writer’s enduring love for Dolly Parton. “This gorgeous reflection on childhood, beauty and origin stories has me blasting my own Dolly Parton albums,” says Anna Holland, an editor in London.

Now, a break from the news

Cook: Coconut macaroons, two easy ways. Like most coconut macaroon recipes, they might just be the easiest and most forgiving of any cookie.

Deal: Everyone in the family hates one another now. Here’s how to have a family meeting. And Amanda Hess sings the praises of daily quarantine clapping.

Read: Our art critic Holland Cotter looks to Henry David Thoreau for some lessons on how to be constructive while alone. And the economist Joseph E. Stiglitz has an absolutely fascinating pile of books on his nightstand that may inspire you to dig into Dickens.

If you need more ideas on activities, our At Home collection has tons of ideas on what to read, cook, watch, and do while staying safe at home.

And now for the Back Story on …

Who’s answering your coronavirus questions

During the coronavirus pandemic, The New York Times has enhanced its offering of service journalism: answers to questions people are asking, and solutions to problems they’re experiencing.

Elisabeth Goodridge and Karen Barrow are two Times journalists now assigned to that coverage. Here’s a taste of their approach, edited from their discussion with Times Insider.

Where have you found support?

ELISABETH Service journalism is coming from every single corner of the newsroom. It’s coming from Business, from Metro, from Parenting, from Health. It’s pretty much the entire newsroom.

How does this differ from what you normally do?

ELISABETH I am usually the deputy travel editor. What I have been doing is figuring out what service stories are needed now. There are three ways I’m approaching it. First, what kind of stories are we hearing from our reporting? Second, what reader questions are coming in? Third, we’re reviewing what people are searching for on Google. Then, actually, fourth is whatever comes out of Karen’s mind.

KAREN My logic, having been an editor for Smarter Living for a couple of years, is that if I’m wondering about it, a lot of other people probably are.

What does an average day look like for you?

KAREN We both have kids, so we’re balancing that. They’re all home. I find myself constantly checking Slack and email and furiously working during windows when they’re busy with other things.

ELISABETH I have been waking up early to get as much work done as I can before my son is awake. We have a lot of meetings. There’s just so much news. In the afternoon, I’m doing a lot of editing. We’re taking ideas from our own lives because we know that other people are having these issues, too.

How do you decompress?

ELISABETH You have to walk around. Drink water.

I think everyone needs to be really disciplined, and I need to start taking my own advice on making sure that we know this is a marathon, not a sprint. And additionally, being good to my mental health, being good to all my co-workers and everyone I know.

KAREN I have a dog who I’ve never loved more because he gets me out of the house twice a day.

That’s it for this briefing. Take care, and see you next time.

— Melina

Thank youTo Melissa Clark for the recipe, and to Theodore Kim and Jahaan Singh for the rest of the break from the news. The Back Story is based on reporting by Danya Issawi. You can reach the team at briefing@nytimes.com.

P.S. We’re listening to “The Daily.” Our latest episode is about the enduring appeal of the parody singer Weird Al Yankovic. Here’s our Mini Crossword, and a clue: Tortoise’s opponent (four letters). You can find all our puzzles here. The Times is assessing the long-term impacts the coronavirus pandemic will have on the restaurant industry. R.S.V.P. here for a chat with Sam Sifton, the founding editor of NYT Cooking, and our restaurant critics in the U.S. and Australia, at 4 p.m. Eastern on Monday (4 a.m Tuesday in Hong Kong).

PHOTO:  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Yawar Nazir/Getty Images FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)